Parliament, Wednesday, 18 November 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Police has welcomed the unqualified audit opinion received by the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (IPID) but has raised concerns over the underperformance in relation to the completion of investigations. The committee today received presentations on the annual reports of the IPID and the Private Security Industry Regulatory Authority (PSiRA). The unqualified opinion is welcomed in the context that the IPID did not have a permanent Executive Director (ED) for the year under review. The committee has commended the senior leadership of the department for steadying the ship despite the challenges they faced. Despite this, the committee is concerned about IPID’s failure to meet its target regarding investigations. “It is disappointing that IPID could only achieve 29% of decision-ready cases from the total cases received. The fact that only 3 885 of the 13 255 cases were investigated and completed does not bode well for the mandate of IPID,” said Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson, the Chairperson of the committee. Nonetheless, the committee welcomed the measures implemented by the newly appointed ED, and is hopeful that through focused interventions, the completion rate of investigations will be improved. This includes the prioritisation of allocated funds to support service delivery and recruitment of additional human resources to strengthen investigations. The committee also welcomed information that forensic auditors have commenced with the audit of allegations of prematurely closed cases. The committee will await a progress report after the end of November 2020. Furthermore, the committee welcomes the information that IPID and the Secretary for Police have commenced the process to review the IPID Act. The committee has always emphasised the need to review the legislation to ensure that it is fit for purpose in the prevailing circumstances. Meanwhile, the committee has raised its displeasure regarding the length it has taken to appoint a PSiRA Council following the ending of the term of office of the previous council in January 2020. While the committee acknowledges progress in the appointment of the council, the committee has urged the ministry to improve its processes to ensure that governance structures are in place. The committee has urged the ministry to conclude the appointment process urgently to strengthen the governance of the institution. Nonetheless, the committee welcomes the second consecutive clean audit obtained by the PSiRA and the achievement of 96% of the targets. Also, the committee welcomes the information that 7 155 security business inspections and 37 136 security officer inspections were conducted, something which will ensure a private security industry which is characterised by professionalism, transparency, accountability, equity and accessibility. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MS TINA JOEMAT-PETTERSSON. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the Committees’ Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	 E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote. Democratic Alliance