Parliament, Friday, 6 November 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development (National Assembly) today received an update from the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development on the impact of the drought on the agricultural sector and the implementation of drought relief in affected provinces.
	
	The Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs declared the state a national drought disaster in March 2020. The committee heard that R138,5 million was allocated to seven provinces, through the National Disaster Management Centre, to address the adverse impact of the drought. These funds were for the drilling and equipping of boreholes, provision of animal feed and fodder production, and for the rehabilitation of dams.
	
	The committee expressed its concern over the low expenditure rate for the Eastern Cape and Western Cape. The remaining five provinces have not spent the budget allocated to them to date and the department reported that they are finalising their procurement plans.
	
	The committee further expressed their concerns over amounts spent on awareness campaigns, with the North West Province having budgeted R8 million, of which R4 million has been spent and Limpopo Province budgeting R500 000 for an early warning information and awareness campaigns, of which R144 000 has been spent.
	
	The department updated the committee that the outbreak of brown locusts, which started in January 2020 after an eight-year dormancy period, ended in July. The second outbreak occurred mid-September in the Northern Cape, Eastern Cape and Western Cape, affecting a total of 336 farms. The department has assured the committee that there is no infestation on crop lands at this stage and the current locust outbreak is under control. The department will continue to monitor and control the outbreak in these provinces.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, LAND REFORM AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT, MS MANKETSI TLHAPE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape