Parliament, Thursday, 26 November 2020 – In an effort to afford South Africans with an opportunity to directly engage with their public representatives and government agencies on the ethos and principles of 16 Days of Activism, Parliament will tomorrow (27 November 2020) host a dialogue on 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children. The dialogue, led by the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly Mr Lechesa Tsenoli and the Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces Ms Sylvia Lucas will be held under the theme: “ACT AND DON’T LOOK AWAY”. As part of the programme, Ms Gugu Ndima, the Author of "All in a Galz Life" will address the gathering on the Socio-Economic implications of Gender-Based Violence, while Dr Keitumetse Disemelo, a Clinical Psychologist, Life Coach and Author of a book titled-Trapped in Love, will reflect on overcoming emotional abuse. The Co-founder of Sonke Gender Justice, Mr Bafana Khumalo will provide practical guidelines on the role of boys and men in fighting Gender-based Violence to challenge and change social norms and attitudes that cause and perpetuate gender-based violence. The dialogue will be attended by among others, Members of Parliament, National Progressive Women’s Forum, South African Youth Council, youth formations, Non-Governmental Organisations, academics and authors. Details of the dialogue are as follows:
	Date: Tomorrow, Friday, 27 November 2020
	Time: 15:00 – 17:00pm
	Venue: Online Platform Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may get involved and follow the virtual session live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408) and via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga