Parliament, Tuesday 03 November 2020 – Deputy President David Mabuza will tomorrow, Wednesday, 04 November answer Questions for Oral Reply in the virtual plenary of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP).
	
	Questions for Oral Reply sessions are one of the mechanisms Parliament uses in order to hold the Executive to account - as stipulated in Section 92(2) of the Constitution that Cabinet Members are accountable collectively and individually to Parliament for the exercise of powers and performance of their functions.
	
	Permanent Delegates to the NCOP will utilize this opportunity to ask the Deputy President a range of questions which include, among others, whether the government has resolved service delivery issues in Qwaqwa; whether the Inter-Ministerial Task Team investigating disruption of road projects has made progress; whether government has considered the possibility of identifying vacant industrial sites to restore and avail them for businesses owned by women and youth; whether the Eskom Chief Operations Officer was suspended to ensure that there was no interference with investigations; whether there was any progress made to improve service delivery in the Emfuleni Municipality; and whether there were any social cohesion activities to calm the high levels of emotions in Senekal.
	
	For all six questions to the Deputy President, please click: List of Questions to the Deputy President
	
	DETAILS OF THE NCOP VIRTUAL SITTING:
	
	Date: Wednesday, 04 November 2020
	Time: 14.00
	Venue: Virtual online platform
	
	Meanwhile, the National Assembly (NA) will hold a Hybrid Plenary Sitting where Ministers from the Economic Cluster will provide oral replies to questions from the Members of the House. The Cluster consists of Ministers of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development; Communications; Employment and Labour; Environmental Affairs, Forestry and Fisheries; Finance; as well as Mineral Resources and Energy.
	
	The series of questions to be answered by the Ministers can be accessed by clicking on the following link: NA question for Cluster 4: Economics.
	
	
	DETAILS OF THE NA HYBRID SITTING:
	Date: Wednesday, 04 November 2020
	Time: 15.00
	Venue: National Assembly Chamber, Parliament and online platform
	
	Important to note:
	
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the NA hybrid sitting should send their details (full name, name of the media house, ID or passport number) to Manelisi Ntsodo on email: mntsodo@parliament.gov.za by no later than 10 am TOMORROW, Wednesday, 04 November.
	
	Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliamentary precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their contact details to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow committee and House sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo: 082 370 6930 It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of North West