Parliament, Thursday, 26 November 2020 – The Powers and Privileges Committee today concluded hearings into the incident that took place on 11 July 2019 during the budget vote speech of the Minister of Public Enterprises, Mr Pravin Gordhan. The committee started today’s proceedings by allowing Members of the committee to ask questions from Mr Collen Mahlangu, the witness who gave oral evidence yesterday. It was clarified that the questions from members was a discretion that the Chairperson was extending to Members in the interest of fairness, as the Rules of the National Assembly do not make provision for such an action. The committee also received oral evidence from Ms Matlala Grace Borotho, the House Chairperson for Internal Matters in the National Assembly. Ms Borotho was the presiding officer at the mini-plenary when the incident occurred. The committee made it clear that the witnesses called to give oral evidence at these hearings do so as fact-finding witnesses. The committee concluded the hearings by hearing oral evidence from Mr Tebello Maleeme, the Deputy Sergeant-at-Arms who is currently acting as the Sergeant-at-Arms of the National Assembly. Mr Maleeme was on duty when the incident occurred. The committee will meet at a later date to consider closing arguments from the Initiator. Thereafter the committee will deliberate on the closing arguments and compile a report to be tabled before the National Assembly. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE POWERS AND PRIVILEGES COMMITTEE, MR PHILLY MAPULANE. For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8268
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. Democratic Alliance