Parliament, Monday, 2 November 2020 – The National Assembly will tomorrow, Tuesday, 3 November 2020 hold an urgent hybrid debate on a matter of national public importance under the theme: “The impact on economic lives of the most vulnerable and poor of commuters due to ongoing damage to public rail infrastructure”. The Chief Whip of the African National Congress, Ms Pemmy Majodina, will lead the debate.
	
	Details of the National Assembly hybrid Debate:
	Date: Tuesday, 3 November 2020
	Venue: Virtual platform and National Assembly Chamber, Parliament
	Time: 14:00
	
	Meanwhile, Parliament’s virtual consultations on the provincial review sessions of the 1994 Women Charter will hold its second leg in the Eastern Cape province. The consultative sessions, led by the Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Ms Sylvia Lucal and the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, Mr Lechesa Tsenoli, will tomorrow (Tuesday, 3 November 2020) hear the views of the people of Joe Gqabi, OR Tambo and Sarah Baartman District Municipalities on the Charter.
	
	The intensive national consultation process on the charter will culminate in the adoption of improved policy and legislative oversight mechanisms, and interventions aimed at removing all structural, institutional and cultural barriers to the realisation of gender equality in South Africa.
	
	Details of the virtual 1994 Women Charter:
	Date: Tuesday, 3 November 2020
	Venue: Virtual platform
	Time: 15:00
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow the virtual session live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408) and via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. Congress of the People