Parliament, Thursday, 5 November 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs yesterday received a briefing from the Municipal Demarcation Board (MDB) on its 2019/20 annual report and received an update on the delimitation process.
	
	The committee commended the MDB on achieving an unqualified audit opinion, with no findings for the 2018/19 and 2019/2020 financial years. The MDB is a model of good governance, having achieved 95% of its targets.
	
	The committee noted that the MDB received a reduced budget of R3,7 million for the current financial year and that MDB has made an effort to work with this budget, such that there will no annual cost of living adjustment for employees as a result of the reduction on compensation of employees. The committee heard that the reduction in goods and services will not have an impact on their operations.
	
	There has been a matter with the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) regarding the top management position of the executive manager of corporate services since 2019. The committee requested progress
	
	on this and was informed that the delay was due to hearings being suspended as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic. However, the MDB met with the CCMA in July and a further meeting has been set for 24 November 2020, where it is hoped that the matter will be finalised. The executive manager’s contract was terminated I November 2018.
	
	The committee received a progress update on the Structures Amendment Bill and noted that the C-list is being developed. The committee called for the MDB to work with all spheres of government and to hold extensive public participation programmes in areas slated for demarcation, so that communities are aware of the boundaries and the facilities within these boundaries, which must benefit the wards within which they find themselves. The demarcation of boundaries must not just be a geographical exercise, but must allow communities straddling provincial borders to have their say.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF COGTA COMMITTEE, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng