Parliament, Tuesday, 17 November 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration (PSA), (National Assembly), will tomorrow receive a briefing from the Auditor-General South Africa on the audit outcomes for the 2019/20 financial year in relation to the Department of Public Service and Administration, National School of Government, Centre for Public Service and Innovation and Public Service Commission. The committee will also be briefed on the progress report with regard to the implementation of the recommendations contained in the budget report (Vote 10) 2019/20 financial year; briefing by the Department of Public Service and Administration and entities (National School of Government and Centre for Public Service Innovation) on the annual reports for 2019/20 financial year as well as the progress report with regard to the implementation of the recommendations contained in the budget report (Vote 10) 2019/20 financial year. Details of the virtual meeting are as follows: Date : Wednesday, 18 November 2020 Time: 09:30 – 13:00 Thereafter the Select Committee on Transport, Public Service and Administration, Public Works and Infrastructure, (National Council of Provinces), will receive a briefing by the Department of Public Service and Administration on its Annual Report. Details of the virtual meeting are as follows: Date : Wednesday, 18 November 2020 Time: 14:00 – 17:00 Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (not private emails). Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	 E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal