Parliament, Tuesday, 10 November 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure has told the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure to keep its mandate together and maintain it in its entirety. Referring to the newly formed Infrastructure South Africa (ISA), the Chairperson of the committee, Ms Nolitha Ntobongwana, said: “We see that there is an additional infrastructure branch in the core responsibility of the department that has been added in the sixth administration. We are noting that money is shifted towards it at the expense of other areas of the department’s mandate. Please department ensure that you broaden your concentration on the entire mandate of the department.” Ms Ntobongwana said although infrastructure is indeed very critical, especially for the success of the government’s economic recovery plan, that does not imply less focus was needed on other areas of the mandate of the department. The committee called for the finalisation of the Public Works Bill which had to be completed in order to strengthen the mandate of the department. The committee received a briefing from the department today on, among other things, expenditure on consultants and outsourced services, and the slow spending trend on compensation of employees, goods and services. These categories in the department’s financial statements were previously reported as due to the non-filling of vacancies, or payment for goods and services due to non-receipt of invoices under Programmes 1, 2, 3 and 4. Although the committee welcomed the presentation of the department, it asked for a detailed report on 40 professionals that would be seconded from the private sector into Infrastructure South Africa. The committee said the report must include the names of each of the 40 specialists, the functions they will fulfil, and the time spent per quarter, per project, and the contracted remuneration for their work on the investment plans of the department. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE, MS NOLITHA NTOBONGWANA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 5031840
	E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng