Parliament, Monday 17 November 2020 – The National Assembly (NA) will tomorrow consider the Standing Committee on Finance’s reports on the Rates and Monetary Amounts and Amendment of Revenue Laws Bill, Taxation Laws Amendment Bill and the Tax Administration Laws Amendment Bill. The consideration of the reports will be followed by the debates on the Bills. During tomorrow’s plenary, the NA is also scheduled to consider other Committees’ reports, amongst them, the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services report on the Notice determining the remuneration of the Deputy Public Protector in terms of section 2A of Public Protector Act. Details of the NA hybrid sitting are as follows: Date: Tuesday, 17 November 2020 Time: 14:00 Venue: NA Chamber and Virtual platform Meanwhile, the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will tomorrow at 08:30 have a briefing session on Parliament’s Oversight and Accountability Programme. The briefing will entail presentations to all permanent delegates to the NCOP led by the House Chairpersons on Parliament’s Oversight and Accountability Model. Parliamentary sittings are open to the media and the public. Media wishing to cover these sittings (including receiving links to them) must send their cell phone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Media must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public can follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live-stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape