Parliament, Sunday 15 November 2020 – Issues scheduled to come up at Parliament this week include Budget-related Bills, oral questions to six Peace and Security Cluster Ministers, a National Men’s Parliament, a debate on Provincial Week, under the theme of “Ensuring Capable and Financially Sound Municipalities”, and 45 committee meetings. Parliament, in partnership with the South African National Aids Council and the Department of Social Development, will host a two-day National Men’s Parliament on Thursday and Friday under the theme: “Institutionalising a Responsive Men’s Movement.” This sectoral Parliament, convened under the banner of the Takuwani Riime Men’s Movement, will bring together about 250 men and boys with the aim of encouraging them to become part of the solution to end social ills including gender-based violence, and for them to become champions of change against toxic masculinity and the spread of HIV. On Tuesday, the NA plenary sitting starting at 14.00 is scheduled to consider the Rates and Monetary Amounts and Amendment of Revenue Laws Bill (B26 of 2020); the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (B27 of 2020) and the Tax Administration Laws Amendment Bill (B28 of 2020). The sitting is also scheduled to consider, among other things, the notice determining remuneration of the Deputy Public Protector and a request for the approval of an Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) for Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. The NA’s plenary sitting starting at 15.00 on Wednesday is scheduled to feature an oral questions session with six Peace and Security Cluster Ministers. These are the Ministers of Defence and Military Veterans; Home Affairs; International Relations and Co-operation; Justice and Correctional Services; Police; and State Security. To read the questions, please click: https://www.parliament.gov.za/storage/app/media/Docs/quest_pap/d95d9a4a-c743-4480-ac5c-8886aba6270d.pdf There are two NA mini-plenaries scheduled for Thursday – both starting at 14.00. Among other things, these are scheduled to consider petitions, an oversight visit and the 2020/21 first quarter performance and expenditure report of the Department of Communications and Digital Technologies. An NA plenary, starting at 10.00 on Friday is scheduled to consider the Division of Revenue Second Amendment Bill, among other issues. The NCOP on Tuesday, from 10.00, is scheduled to hold a briefing session on Parliament’s Oversight and Accountability Programme. On Thursday, from 14.00, the NCOP is scheduled to debate Provincial Week under the theme: “Ensuring Capable and Financially Sound Municipalities”. On Friday, from 15.00, the NCOP is scheduled to feature a dialogue on 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children. Committees of both houses are scheduled to meet from Tuesday to Friday. The 45 scheduled meetings cover a range of issues, including:  TUESDAY, 17 NOVEMBER Portfolio Committee on Transport: Responses by the Department of Transport on written and oral submissions on the Economic Regulation of Transport Bill [B1 – 2020]; Consideration and adoption of draft minutes of proceedings. Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure: Briefing by the OAG and DPWI on the annual performance of the Department, PMTE and its Entities. Joint Meeting: Portfolio Committee on Basic Education and Select Committee on Education and Technology, Sports, Arts and Culture: Consideration and Adoption of Draft Minutes and Draft Reports; Briefing by Provincial Education Departments (PEDs) on the Status and Impact of COVID-19 Lockdown on Schooling: Limpopo Department of Education; Briefing by DBE on Inclusive Education]. Portfolio Committee on Communications: Briefing by the Auditor-General of South Africa (AGSA) on their 2019/20 audit findings of the Department of Communications, Department of Telecommunications and Postal Services, Government Communication and Information System (GCIS) and all entities reporting to the three Departments]. Standing Committee on Finance: Consideration and adoption of the Committee report and voting on the Auditing Profession Amendment Bill]. Select Committee on Finance: Briefing by National Treasury on the TLAB, TALAB and Rates bill. Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs: Electoral Laws Amendment Bill response by the IEC and deliberations. Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy: Briefing by DMRE on Derelict and Ownerless Mines (including the rehabilitation of asbestos mines); Consideration and adoption of Minutes of 11 November 2020. Standing Committee on Appropriations: Consideration and Adoption of Committee’s draft report on the Division of Revenue Second Amendment Bill [B24-2020]; Consideration and adoption of Committee’s revised programme and draft minutes. Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology: Briefing by the Department of Science and Innovation (DSI) on second quarterly performance report 2020/21; Briefing by the Department of Higher Education and Training (DHET) on second quarterly performance report; Consideration of minutes.  WEDNESDAY, 18 NOVEMBER Portfolio Committee on Social Development: Briefing by the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the Annual Reports of the Department of Social Development and its entities for 2019/20 financial year; Briefing by the Auditor General on the audit outcomes of the Annual Reports of the Department of Social Development and its entities for 2019/20 financial year. Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Briefing by President of UDM on allegations of maladministration, mismanagement, and corruption at the Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA). Standing Committee on Appropriations: Hearing with the Department of Water and Sanitation on the Second Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B25-2020]. Portfolio Committee on Police: Consideration of the 2019/20 Annual Report of the Private Security Industry Regulatory Authority (PSIRA): Financial statements and performance. Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy: Update by the DMRE on the developments relating to the Ketlaphela State Owned Pharmaceutical Company. Portfolio Committee on Communications: Briefing by SABC on the continuation of the presentation made on 28 October 2020 dealing with: the viability and profitability of its commercial services; a plan of action how it plans to align the large listenership and viewership with revenue generation; expenditure report on the R500 million already spent on procurement of compelling content; active contracts spend of R266 million and a further detailed value chain of all the contracts - CLOSED MEETING. Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration: Auditor-General South Africa to brief the Committee on the audit outcomes for 2019/20 financial year in relation to the DPSA, NSG, CPIS and PSC; Briefing on the progress report with regard to the implementation of the recommendations contained in the budget report (Vote 10) 2019/20 financial year; Briefing by the Department of Public Service and Administration and entities (National School of Government and Centre for Public Service Innovation) on the annual reports for 2019/20 financial year. (BRRR); Briefing on the progress report with regard to the implementation of the recommendations contained in the budget report (Vote 10) 2019/20 financial year. Portfolio Committee on Small Business Development: Consideration and adoption of 2020 Budget Review & Recommendations Report], Virtual Meeting Platform, 09:30-13:00. Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises: [Briefing by Transnet on their annual report and financial statements for the 2019/20 financial year; Consideration and adoption of Budgetary Review and Recommendations report. Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans: DWF reporting on progress with devolution of responsibilities from the DPWI, and funding issues. Select Committee on Public Enterprises and Communication: Briefing by Rheinmetal-Denel on the safety of workers following the death of eight workers in 2018 at the Somerset West plant.  THURSDAY, 19 NOVEMBER Joint Standing Committee on Defence: Presentation by South African Unintegrated Forces United Front on their grievances; Adoption of Minutes and Reports  FRIDAY, 20 NOVEMBER Standing Committee on Appropriations: Hearing with the Department of Transport on the Second Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B25-2020]. Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs: Progress report by the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) and Directorate for Priority Crimes Investigations (DPCI) on VBS related matters; Briefing by Department of Cooperative Governance (DCOG) – Anti Corruption unit on progress made with regard to forensic investigations in local government. Constitutional Review Committee: Consideration and adoption of Committee Reports and minutes. Joint Standing Committee on the Financial Management of Parliament: Briefing by Secretary to Parliament on the institution’s performance in the 2nd quarter of the 2020/21 financial year.  For the latest full schedule of committee meetings please visit: https://www.parliament.gov.za ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape