Parliament, Wednesday 18 November 2020 - The media briefing that was scheduled to announce the approach to the programme of the National Men’s Parliament, which was scheduled for this afternoon at 2pm, has been cancelled. However, the actual event, the two-day National Men’s Parliament, scheduled for Thursday and Friday (19-20 November) still goes ahead. The event will be held under the theme: “Institutionalising a Responsive Men’s Movement” and hosted by Parliament - in partnership with the South African National Aids Council and the Department of Social Development. This sectoral Parliament will bring together about 250 men and boys with the aim of encouraging them to become part of the solution to end social ill including gender-based violence and for them to become champions of change against toxic masculinity and the spread of HIV. Details of the National Men’s Parliament are as follows: Date: Thursday 19 and Friday 20 November 2020 Time: 14:00 on both days Venue: National Assembly Chamber, Parliament and virtual platform Important to note: Members of the media who wish to physically attend the National Men’s Parliament should send their details (full name, name of the media house, ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: mmpindi@parliament.gov.za by no later than 11 am TOMORROW, Wednesday, 18 November. Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliamentary precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival. Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their contact details to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may follow committee and House sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Free State