Parliament, Wednesday, 4 November 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Communications has welcomed presentations by the Department of Communications and Digital Technologies, together with its two entities, namely Sentech and Zadna, on their annual reports for the 2019/20 financial year.
	
	The committee applauded the department for obtaining an unqualified audit outcome in the year under review, as well as Sentch and Zadna for clean audits for the eighth and fourth consecutive years respectfully.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Boyce Maneli, said the achievements by Sentech and Zadna are a clear indication of the board playing its role and the executives doing their job in a complementary manner.
	
	Sentech’s revenue grew by 6%, and the entity achieved 100% of its predetermined objectives. Zadna, on the other hand, reported a surplus of R2.534 million, while it achieved 82% of its planned targets.
	
	The committee expressed appreciation for the seamless transition on the merger between the then-Department of Communications and the Department of Telecommunications and Postal Services, which became the Department of Communications and Digital Technologies. The merger occurred ahead of the set deadline.
	
	Although he expressed appreciation for the unqualified audit, Mr Maneli also reiterated that the department still needs to double its efforts in order to achieve a clean audit.
	
	The committee encouraged that state entities should prefer trading with one other for the required goods and services in order to maximise on the economies of scale. It also reiterated that entities should learn best practices from one another with regard to prudent financial management systems and internal controls.
	
	Lastly, the committee expressed a view on the matter of signal management between Sentech and the South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC), and it encouraged the two entities to engage in the manner that will best serve their interests and those of the public.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE COMMUNICATIONS, MR BOYCE MANELI
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committees’ Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng