Parliament, Thursday, 26 November 2020 – The departments of Public Service and Administration and of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation, as well as the Public Service Commission (PSC) and Statistics South Africa (Stats SA) appeared before the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration yesterday for deliberations on their draft Budgetary Review Recommendation Reports for their budget votes. The committee commended Stats SA for receiving an unqualified audit in consecutive years, including the 2019/20 financial year. Furthermore, the committee commended Stats SA for its good performance, despite the fact that the entity operates with very limited financial and human resources. The committee raised concerns about the high vacancy rate at Stats SA as a result of budgetary limits for compensating employees. This has resulted in employees, especially in middle and senior management, carrying an additional workload and becoming overstretched by the demands of the job. This poses a risk to accurate data collection and analysis that could have a negative impact on quality. The committee remains optimistic that the additional budget allocated for the 2020/21 financial year will assist Stats SA in filling critical positions. The committee calls on the government to honour its salary agreement for public servants, as it had committed to a three-year wage agreement with organised labour. With the exception of the Democratic Alliance and the Economic Freedom Fighters, who opposed the draft Budgetary Review and Recommendation Reports, the committee adopted the budget reports. The committee also adopted the report on the filling of the post of the Public Service Commissioner, which will be forwarded to the National Assembly for adoption. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION, MR TYOTYO JAMES. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo