Parliament, Tuesday, 17 November 2020 – Ministers in the Peace and Security Cluster will “appear” before the National Assembly (NA) hybrid plenary tomorrow, Wednesday 18 November at 15:00, to provide oral replies to questions from Members of the House. The Peace and Security Cluster comprises of Ministers of Defence and Military Veterans, Home Affairs, International Relations and Cooperation, Justice and Correctional Services, Police and State Security. The hybrid sitting will entail a limited number of Members of Parliament (in line with the social distancing guidelines) being physically present in the NA Chamber and other MPs joining the sitting through a virtual platform. Parliament uses a range of instruments to hold the executive accountable as section 92(2) of the Constitution stipulates that Cabinet Members are accountable collectively and individually to Parliament for the exercise of their powers and performances of their functions. Questions the Ministers are expected to provide answers to tomorrow include the current level of overcrowding in correctional facilities, the current backlog of DNA samples and how the Covid-19 regulations impact of the SAPS’ capacity to deal with domestic and gender-based violence. For the full list of questions, please click on the following hyperlink: https://www.parliament.gov.za/storage/app/media/Docs/quest_pap/d95d9a4a-c743-4480-ac5c-8886aba6270d.pdf DETAILS OF THE HYBRID SITTING ARE AS FOLLOWS: Date: Wednesday 18 November 2020 Time: 15:00 Venue: National Assembly Chamber, Parliament and virtual platform Members of the media who would like to observe the Sitting may forward their contact details to Mr Mlindi Mpindi on mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliament Communications Service WhatsApp group, where login details will be shared. Journalists are urged to forward the request using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may follow the virtual engagement live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga