Parliament, Thursday, 26 November 2020 – The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) will this weekend visit KwaZulu-Natal to interact with various municipalities to evaluate the state of municipalities and assess the implementation of consequence management to remedy perennial negative audit opinions. According to the 2018/19 local government audit outcomes released by the Auditor-General, weaknesses in local government have hampered accountability. The visit will seek to understand the factors contributing to municipal instability, assess the implementation of recommendations made by various forensic reports, evaluate if cases of unauthorised, irregular, fruitless, and wasteful expenditure have been investigated, and consequence management implemented. The committee will interact with uMgungundlovu, Umkhanyakude and Zululand District Municipalities, and Mpofana, Richmond and Nquthu Local Municipalities. In the 2018/19 financial year, uMgungundlovu District Municipality was the worst-performing district with six qualified audit opinions, including the district municipality and Richmond Local Municipality and one disclaimed opinion for Mpofana Local Municipality. UMkhanyakude District Municipality had four qualified audit opinions. Zululand DM improved its audit opinions with only two qualified audits. Lastly, Nquthu Local Municipality received an unqualified audit opinion. Issues associated with the negative audits include non-compliance with legislation and policies, weak governance structures, poor quality of annual financial statements, poor financial controls and inadequate contract management, and lack of consequence management. The committee’s intention is to ensure that workable solutions are found and implemented, with the aim of ensuring viable municipalities delivering on the objects of local government as set out in section 152 of the Constitution. The programme for the oversight visit can be retrieved here: https://www.parliament.gov.za/storage/app/media/Links/2020/November/26-11-2020/2020-11-18_Draft_ovesight_visit_to_COGTA_KZN_26-_29_November_2020.pdf ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SCOPA, MR MKHULEKO HLENGWA For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	 E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape