Parliament, Tuesday, 10 November 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA), today received a briefing from the South African Local Government Association (Salga) on its 2019/20 Annual Report. “During the year under review, Salga participated actively in the business of the committee. The Annual Report correctly emphasises this as one of the highlights of 2019/20. The committee has benefited immensely from Salga’s well-researched, insightful and well-articulated contributions, especially in relation to the Municipal Systems Amendment Bill, which the committee adopted last week,” said the Chairperson, Ms Faith Muthambi. Salga’s internal control environment also remains impressive, with eight consecutive audits and the achievement of 38 out of 39 targets as set out in the 2019/20 Annual Performance Plan. This is in stark contrast to the state of affairs in the member municipalities, which Salga assists and supports. This is the main dilemma with Salga. There are many innovative outputs detailed throughout the report, but the absorption rate by the member municipalities leaves much to be desired. One of the examples is the reported implementation of the Municipal Audit Support Programme in 62 red zone municipalities. Yet the number of disclaimed opinions among these municipalities increased from 26 to 33. The diagrammatic representation of the National Treasury Framework for Strategic Plans and Annual Performance Plans, in the Annual Report, depicts Salga’s work as active on the bottom three rungs of the pyramid, namely the inputs, activities and outputs. The top two rungs of the pyramid relate to the outcomes, or results of Salga’s interventions on municipalities, and impact or long-term results at local government level. This is where the work of Salga starts becoming more aspirational and less definitive. The Auditor-General has consistently identified the lack of accountability and poor consequence management as serious areas of weakness in municipalities. Salga’s intervention in this regard has been the development of an accountability and consequence management protocol, with the envisaged outcome/impact of stronger oversight and accountability in local government. There is still a significant gap between the protocol and its envisaged outcome and impact. The committee said that it is common knowledge that accountability and consequence management in local government are nowhere near to where they should be. This again emphasises the point that, when measured against the last two rungs of the National Treasury pyramid, Salga’s interventions are not quite decisive, said Chairperson of the Committee, Ms Muthambi. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COGTA COMMITTEE, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	 E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. Congress of the People on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo