Parliament, Tuesday, 17 November 2020 – The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) will tomorrow be briefed by the President of the United Democratic Movement (UDM), Mr Bantu Holomisa, on allegations of maladministration, mismanagement, and corruption at the Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA). Scopa received Mr Holomisa’s letter on Friday, 23 October 2020. Scopa then consulted with Parliamentary Legal Services on the process that should be followed when attending to this letter. After the briefing, the committee will deliberate on the contents of the letter as it conducts a fact-finding process. Details of the meeting are as follows: Date: Wednesday, 18 November 2020 Time: 09:00 Scopa will also be briefed by the Eastern Cape Provincial’s Government MEC for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs on consequence management against municipalities with investigations. Details of the meeting are as follows: Date: Wednesday, 18 November 2020 Time: 11:30 Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES. For media enquiries, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8268
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. African National Congress