Parliament, Tuesday 17 November 2020 - Parliament, in partnership with the South African National Aids Council and the Department of Social Development, will host a two-day National Men’s Parliament on Thursday, 19, and Friday, 20 November under the theme: “Institutionalising a Responsive Men’s Movement.” This second biennial sectoral Parliament, convened under the banner of the Takuwani Riime Men’s Movement, will bring together about 250 men and boys from across the country to engage them to become agents of change and integral partners in the prevention and response in tackling the spread of HIV, Gender-Based Violence and Femicide and other social ills. The first day of the Men’s Parliament coincides with International Men’s Day (19 November), providing an opportunity for provinces to share outcomes of their localised rolling provincial, district and municipal Men’s Parliaments, to consolidate work achieved and establish new priorities for the next term. The National Men’s Parliament will be launched at a media briefing to be led by the National Assembly Deputy Speaker, Mr Lechesa Tsenoli, the National Council of Provinces Deputy Chairperson, Ms Sylvia Lucas, and the Deputy Minister of Social Development, Ms Hendrietta Bogopane-Zulu. DETAILS OF THE HYBRID MEDIA BRIEFING: Date: Wednesday, 18 November 2020 Time: 14.00 Venue: Committee Room E249, Second Floor, National Assembly Building, Parliament and online platform  Important to note: Members of the media who wish to physically attend the media briefing and the National Men’s Parliament should send their details (full name, name of the media house, ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: mmpindi@parliament.gov.za by no later than 11 am TOMORROW, Wednesday, 18 November. Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliamentary precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival. Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their contact details to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may follow committee and House sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo: 082 370 6930 The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. African National Congress