Parliament, Wednesday, 18 November 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development, Inkosi Mandla Mandela, has welcomed the commitment to real investment announced by President Cyril Ramaphosa at the third South African Investment Conference. Inkosi Mandela said the significant investments in a number of key sectors are encouraging, especially given the devastating impact that the Covid-19 pandemic has had on the South African economy and on the lives of South Africans, especially in the deep rural areas. “We are deeply concerned that the investment conference should go beyond the analogy of the Protea and the South African Poultry Plan in driving investment in the agriculture and agri-industries sector. For many rural communities which are dependent on subsistence farming, the issues of food security, hunger and poverty were a reality before the pandemic. Now they find themselves in dire straits,” said Inkosi Mandela. President Ramaphosa delivered an opening address at the third South Africa Investment Conference at the Sandton Convention Centre in Johannesburg today. He said South Africa has a well-established, highly developed and world class formal agricultural sector. He added: “This is where we must migrate our subsistence and small-scale farming by attracting substantial investments into our agriculture economy.” He said South Africa's potential to lead Africa into a new era must leverage the fact that half of the world's arable land is in Sub-Saharan Africa. “This is an immeasurable opportunity that is begging for investment. We call on the Investment Conference to give this priority attention. Africa beyond the pandemic faces a huge challenge with hunger, endemic poverty and under-development. Food insecurity stares most African nations in the face and is a major impediment to progress on the continent.” Inkosi Mandela said the committee also welcomes the President's commitment to land reform as a key driver for unlocking the potential of the agricultural sector. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, LAND REFORM AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT, INKOSI ZWELIVELILE MANDELA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	 E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of North West