Parliament, Wednesday, 11 November 2020 – The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) today was briefed by the Anti-Corruption Task Team (ACTT) on corruption cases currently under investigation. Despite challenges with capacity at the ACTT, Scopa appreciates the progress made in finalising cases. Scopa has requested the ACTT’s terms of reference. This will assist the committee to offer guidance to the ACTT when it is necessary. Scopa has also requested a further specific breakdown of the 223 cases currently within the ACTT. This will assist Scopa to ascertain the age analysis of the cases and to gauge the financial resources needed when working on these cases. Scopa has noted the departments and entities involved in the cases. These include municipalities, the departments of Public Works and Infrastructure, Health, and Education among others, as well as the South African Revenue Service, the South African Police Service and the South African Social Security Agency. Scopa has also requested further specific breakdowns on the cases the ACTT is dealing with in these departments, particularly on the cases involving municipalities. Scopa also wants a breakdown of all the 220 cases referred to the Fusion Centre within the Financial Intelligence Centre. Scopa has requested the ACTT to submit this information by Monday, 16 November 2020. Scopa has also requested the ACTT to prioritise the Steinhoff matter, as it remains an indictment on the South African body politic at every material perspective. It has to receive the kind of attention due a priority matter. If it does not, it will encourage further corruption. Scopa wants to see a concerted effort to pursue the Steinhoff matter to its logical legal conclusion, including but not limited to arrests and recoveries, in particular for the people directly affected by this corruption. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SCOPA, MR MKHULEKO HLENGWA. For media enquiries and interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape