Parliament, Saturday, 7 November 2020 – The Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution today finalised its countrywide public hearings which will pave the way for the expropriation of land without compensation.
	
	The public hearings came to a finalisation in Polokwane, Limpopo, with a packed hall, strictly in terms of Covid-19 Level 1 regulations. The committee earlier this week resolved to return to Polokwane to hold the public hearing it had to cancel two weeks ago due to disruptions caused by certain groupings. Today, however, all participants sat orderly in the hall waiting for an opportunity to make inputs whilst other waited for their turn outside.
	
	Committee Chairperson, Dr Mathole Motshekga, commended the crowd for the peaceful behavior in which they attended the public hearings. “It is clear that participants are adhering to health protocols under Covid-19 Level 1 regulations.”
	
	Dr Motshekga reminded the meeting that the mandate of the committee is to seek input on the content and formulation of section 25 of the Constitution that would allow for the amendment. “We are here because we do not have the monopoly of wisdom and want to get your input.”
	
	The majority of participants made it clear that the expropriation of land without compensation is long overdue. Many indicated that the amendment should include that natural resources like land and minerals should be in the ownership of the state.
	
	According to participants, this will improve social and economic transformation. Participants indicated that they would want to see in the amendment that no provision of this amendment may impede the state to expropriate land without compensation.
	
	Some participants indicated that the process should start with the expropriation of urban land without compensation as the majority of people were moved previously far from the central business districts where work opportunities are. Now they spend a lot of time and money commuting to work daily. They said the concept of “willing buyer, willing seller”, which is currently used by the State, does not work. They complained about the 1913 cut-off date for land claims as it limited land restitution and redistribution.
	
	Dr Motshekga said this is the last leg of the public hearings to allow for the expropriation of land without compensation. “The amendment will be the greatest victory for all, black and white, as it is a lasting solution to the challenges of South Africa. The people have spoken. Now that this has happened, the best that can happen is for Members of Parliament to vote in favour of the report recommending this. It will address the problem of the triple challenges of poverty, unemployment and inequality.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INITIATE AND INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AMENDING SECTION 25 OF THE CONSTITUTION, DR MATHOLE MOTSHEKGA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng