Parliament, Monday, 9 November 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education has condemned today’s reported protest and violence outside Brackenfell High School near Cape Town. Committee Chairperson, Ms Bongiwe Mbinqo-Gigaba, has called for calm to return to the school. “I think it is important for all the parties to remember that the Grade 12s have started their National Senior Certificate examinations. This has already been an extremely challenging year for the Class of 2020 due to the outbreak of Covid-19 and the academic year being disrupted. They do not need the added stress of violent protest as they are trying to focus on the examinations.” Ms Mbinqo-Gigaba’s comments follows reports of members of a political party protesting outside the school and being allegedly confronted by stick-wielding parents in a stand-off that ended in the street. According to reports, fists, expletives and rocks flew, forcing the crowd to scatter. Police intervened with stun grenades to stop the clash The school has been embroiled in a race scandal after a matric event was held and attended by white students only. The controversy first surfaced on social media where a video was shared, showing white students arriving at the red-carpet function. It was alleged that the school hosted a matric farewell only for their white students while non-white pupils were not informed, nor invited to the event. The school has since distanced itself from this incident, saying the event was organised by parents. Ms Mbinqo-Gigaba said racial segregation in schools and school events does not have a place in South Africa. “I note the conflicting reports on who organised the event. To provide clarity, I call on the Western Cape Department of Education to do an investigation into the matter. “Should the investigation find that any officials, including educators, be found to be involved, were aware or approved of the function, action should be taken against them. Furthermore, I call on all parents and other parties not to take the law into their own hands.” ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINQO-GIGABA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo