Parliament, Monday, 2 November 2020 – The Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution today resolved to return to Polokwane in Limpopo this coming weekend to hold the public hearing it had to cancel recently due to disruptions caused by certain groupings.
	
	The committee, led by its Chairperson Dr Mathole Motshekga, will hold the public hearing on Saturday in Polokwane in the Jack Botes hall in order for the public to make inputs on the format and content of the Constitutional amendment to allow for the expropriation of land without compensation.
	
	A committee delegation visited Limpopo from 22 to 25 October 2020, planning to hold four public hearings. On the last day of the hearings, the delegation had to call off the hearing as Members of Parliament, local politicians and security personnel tried for hours to calm the crowd in order to proceed with the hearing.
	
	A scuffle ensued between groupings of the African National Congress and the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) after the EFF allegedly forced its way into a hall that was already full in terms of Covid-19 regulations. The group in the red t-shirts did not want to wait its turn outside the hall for an opportunity to make inputs. After many attempts, the leader of the delegation called off the hearing due to health and safety concerns.
	
	Political parties today gave the assurance that their supporters will conduct themselves in a respectful manner that is in compliance with Covid-19 Level 1 regulations. The committee also received a request to hold a hearing in the Waterberg district of Limpopo. The committee further resolved that it will not include another district for hearings in Limpopo, as it would open up the way for more requests on hearings in other provinces. Dr Motshekga said: “I am persuaded that we should not reopen the programme and rather stick to the programme for the hearings that was previously agreed to by the committee.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INITIATE AND INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AMENDING SECTION 25 OF THE CONSTITUTION, DR MATHOLE MOTSHEKGA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal