Parliament, Wednesday, 18 November 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services has commended all the institutions and entities reporting to it on the clean audit opinions they received, especially the Office of the Public Protector South Africa (PPSA) which received its first unqualified audit in 25 years. Committee Chairperson Mr Bulelani Magwanishe said the committee received a briefing from the office of the Auditor-General South Africa (AGSA) yesterday regarding the 2019-2020 audit outcomes of the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development, the PPSA and the Office of the Chief Justice (OCJ). “The committee would especially like to commend all our institution that have been improving on how they conduct their business and those that have continued to keep up the good work. We are proud of all of you. We would, however, like to single out the office of the PPSA, as it is their first clean audit with no findings in 25 years. This speaks to the hard work of all officials to ensure that they get to this point. We appeal to the PPSA to keep up the good work and continue with this positive trend.” According to the AGSA, the improvement in audit outcomes in this office is mainly attributable to improvement in daily and monthly processing controls; implementation and monitoring as a tool to monitor payments to suppliers; improved quality review processes of financial and performance reports; stability in finance, supply chain management and performance management positions; and the monitoring of compliance with laws and applicable legislation. Mr Magwanishe further commended the OCJ for maintaining clean audit outcomes for the past three financial years. This, according to the AGSA, is due to the quality review processes the department has implemented and maintained. The department’s monitoring of compliance with laws and applicable legislation also contributed to maintaining the clean audit outcome. “The OCJ is clearly an example to others. It shows that clean audits can be maintained when correct processes are followed as a norm. The office should be commended.” ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, MR BULELANI MAGWANISHE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. African National Congress