Parliament, Monday 30 November 2020 – The National Assembly (NA) will during its hybrid plenary tomorrow debate the escalating crisis at the South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC); receive a Ministerial Statement on the festive season safety plan and consider the Upgrading of Land Tenure Rights Amendment Bill - amongst others. The debate on an urgent matter of national public importance titled: “The escalating crisis at the SABC and the implications thereof for the institution’s mandate as a public broadcaster,” will be led by Ms Zandile Majozi from the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP). Meanwhile, Minister of Transport Mr Fikile Mbalula will be in the NA to present a Statement on the Department of Transport’s festive season safety plan. The Bill intends to amend the Upgrading of Land Tenure Rights Act, 1991, to provide for the application for the conversion of land tenure rights into ownership; to provide for the notice of informing interested persons of an application to convert land tenure rights into ownership and to provide an opportunity for interested persons to object to the conversion of land tenure rights into ownership. The above will be preceded by the consideration of Budgetary Review and Recommendation Reports (BRRR) of various departments to start at 10:00. The BRR reports for each government department are compiled and submitted by Committees for tabling in the NA following the adoption of the Appropriations Bill and before the adoption of the reports on the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. This process, helps the Parliamentary committees to get an opportunity to review and make recommendations on each department’s spending and forward allocation of the available resources. DETAILS OF THE HYBRID SITTING ARE AS FOLLOWS: Date: Tuesday, 01 December 2020 Time: 10:00 to 18:00 Venue: NA Chamber and Virtual platform Important to note: Members of the media who wish to physically attend the NA hybrid sitting should send their details (full name, name of the media house, ID or passport number) to Manelisi Ntsodo on email: mntsodo@parliament.gov.za by no later than 16:00 TODAY, Monday, 30 November. Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliamentary precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival. Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their contact details to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may follow committee and House sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo: 082 370 6930 The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal