Parliament, Wednesday 11 November 2020 – Separate plenary sittings of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) and the National Assembly (NA) today agreed to the Fiscal Framework and revenue proposals of the 2020 Medium Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS). This followed recommendations for its adoption from the NCOP’s Select Committee on Finance and the NA’s Standing Committee on Finance. Parliament will now consider the 2020 Division of Revenue Second Amendment Bill and the 2020 Second Adjustments Appropriation Bill. The Minister of Finance, Mr Tito Mboweni, tabled these Bills, the revised fiscal framework and the proposed 2021 medium-term fiscal framework on 28 October, when he delivered the 2020 MTBPS to Parliament. The Select and Standing Committee on Finance held a series of meetings on the revised frameworks with the Minister of Finance, the Deputy Minister of Finance, National Treasury and received analyses and submissions on them from the Parliamentary Budget Office and the Financial and Fiscal Commission. The committees also invited public comments and, in response, received submissions from the Congress of South African Trade Unions, the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants, the Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse, the Fiscal Cliff Study Group, the Healthy Living Alliance, Mr Peter Meakin, the Budget Justice Coalition, the Pay the Grant Campaign, the Katsia Capital Partners, the Dear South Africa Campaign, Old Mutual Investment and Amandla.Mobi. In their reports, the Committees note that the 2020 revised and proposed fiscal frameworks come three months after Parliament passed the 2020 special adjustment budget in July, which was presented in response to the COVID-19 global pandemic’s health and socio-economic crises. The 2020 MTBPS, themed “securing economic recovery beyond COVID-19”, complements social and economic measures, which President Cyril Ramaphosa announced in March and April, and also follows Parliament’s adoption in October of the Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan, which the President tabled before Parliament. The committees raised a range of concerns and recommendations in their reports. These include the need for more details on how the R10.5 billion allocated to South African Airways would be spent and a recommendation for speedy establishment of the proposed Presidential State Owned Enterprises Council, which would provide strategic oversight of state-owned companies and ensure an end to their dependence on the fiscus. To read the committees’ reports in full in Parliament’s Announcement, Tablings and Committee Reports dated 10 November 2020, please click https://tinyurl.com/y2qltqwg. The NA’s Standing Committee on Finance report starts on page 6 and the NCOP’s Select Committee on Finance report starts on page 52. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal