Parliament, Wednesday, 04 November 2020 – The National Assembly (NA) will hold two virtual mini-plenaries tomorrow to discuss the plight of farm workers and the continuing bailout of State Owned Entities (both starting at 2pm) while the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will hold Questions with the Social Services Cluster Ministers.
	
	One mini-plenary will discuss the financial burden of sustaining non-profitable state-owned entities, and how the Government can re-appropriate the continual bailouts used to sustain these entities. This mini-plenary will also consider the report of the Portfolio Committee (PC) on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs on the Petition relating to allegations of corruption and mismanagement at the Knysna Local Municipality, Western Cape and the report of the PC on Higher Education, Science and Technology on the oversight visit to Gauteng.
	
	The other mini-plenary will deal with a draft resolution on the establishment of an ad-hoc committee to conduct a comprehensive review of the living and working conditions of farmworkers in South Africa. It will also consider the report of the PC on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs on the petition from the residents of Letsitele Town, in Tzaneen, calling on the Assembly to ensure that the Tzaneen municipality abides by the laws, by-laws and regulations, and that it implements the prescribed environment and applicable zoning, as well as monitor and halt all illegal activities. The session will also consider the report of the PC on Tourism on the Transformation Charter in the Tourism Sector.
	
	The NCOP, on the other hand, will hold a virtual questions session with Social Services Cluster Ministers (which consists of the Minister of Health and Minister of Sport, Art and Culture). The questions to the Minister of Health will cover a range of topics including assistance of the National Health Insurance (commonly known as the NHI), permanent employment of nurses, minimizing effects of Covid-19 and procurement/ awarding of tenders for PPEs.
	
	The Minister of Sport, Arts and Culture will answer questions on the funding for the KZN entertainment awards, audit of statues/symbols/monuments, the sector relief programmes, lack of development of sporting codes and assistance to arts/culture sector.
	
	Click here for the link to the full question paper.
	
	Meanwhile, the NCOP will start the morning tomorrow by convening its respective Programming Committee meeting to plan its business. Amongst issues to be considered are the committee reports, Bills before the House, virtual plenary sittings and the upcoming programmes of the House.
	
	Details of the virtual meetings:
	
	Date: Thursday, 5 November, 2020
	Time: 08:30 am
	The meeting will take place via online video platform.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. Inkatha Freedom Party on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng