Parliament, Wednesday, 11 November 2020 – On behalf of the committee, the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation, Ms Tandi Mahambehlala, joins millions of peace-loving people around the world in extending heartfelt condolences to all Palestinians on the passing of chief negotiator Dr Saeb Erekat. The committee sends particular condolences to Dr Erekat’s family and friends. Dr Erekat dedicated his life to achieving lasting peace and freedom for the Palestinian people. He relentlessly insisted on the importance of a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, even as it seemed to slip further down the priority list of Western nations and the Arab world. He will be remembered for steadfast criticism of what he saw as Israel’s systematic denial of Palestinians’ right to exist, to live in freedom and to celebrate their national identity. He never relented in drawing the attention of the world to the reality of occupied Palestine. He saw the illegal occupancy of Palestinian lands as a manifestation of an Israel that is a “colonial-apartheid state”, as he once stated. The committee recalls him saying: “For the Israeli government, not only the issues of Jerusalem and Palestinian refugees are off the table, but also Palestine’s very existence." The committee remembers his recent statements regarding the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain announcement, which was hailed as a major reversal of Arab policy and which normalised relations with Israel, but did little to advance progress on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. With equanimity Dr Erekat told CNN in January: “What we hear about Jerusalem being Israel’s capital, dropping the refugee issue, security, borders; it cannot be called the deal of the century. It is the fraud and the hoax of the century.” “May his soul rest in peace and in power,” said Ms Mahambehlala. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND COOPERATION, MS TANDI MAHAMBEHLALA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mr Sibongile Maputi
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	 E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. Economic Freedom Fighters on the National List