Parliament, Wednesday, 3 June 2020 – The Select Committee on Transport, Public Service and Administration and Public Works and Infrastructure today received a briefing from Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa) on its Annual Performance Plan.
	
	The briefing formed part of the budget vote process of deliberating and approving the five-year strategic and annual performance plans as required by the Money Bills Act of 2009.
	
	The committee said it has already started noting some improvements at the entity since the appointment of the administrator, Mr Bongisizwe Mpondo, and it also noted that he was appointed to revive an entity that was collapsing where corruption, maladministration, fruitless and wasteful expenditure was never challenged in over a decade.
	
	The administrator reported that Prasa is operating on a R2.8 billion deficit which is increasing due to an additional R750 million required for COVID-19 interventions.
	
	The committee heard that the new operational model and structure has seen appointments of highly skilled executives at Prasa who will bring stability to the management of the entity. The administrator told the committee that Prasa is working closely with the Special Investigations Unit, and reported that 12 senior managers have been suspended and nine have been charged.
	
	The committee heard that 16 matters have been referred by the Hawks to the specialised unit of the National Prosecutions Authority for the Commercial Crimes Court. The committee welcomes this as the start of cleaning the entity of looters.
	
	The committee urged Prasa to ensure that maximum attention is given to the Corridor Recovery Programme as the Cape Town Mainline and the Mabopane line in Gauteng are central in the transportation of workers to work, and the fact that they are not working has inconvenienced and added financial burden to already stressed people in disadvantaged communities who rely heavily on the lines for transport.
	
	The chairperson of the committee, Mr Kenny Mmoiemang, told the entity that one of its key areas of focus for this financial year is to address all the matters that were raised by the Auditor General to improve its operational performance. The chairperson said, he hopes that in this financial year, the automated system of cashless tickets is implemented.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION AND PUBLIC WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE, MR KENNY MMOIEMANG.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo