Parliament, Friday, 19 June 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration (PSA) today received briefings from the Department of Planning Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME), Brand South Africa (Brand SA) and Statistics South Africa (Stats SA) on their fourth quarter performance of the 2019/20 financial year.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Tyotyo James, welcomed all the presentations. The Chairperson took cognisance of the fact that the Covid-19 pandemic has disrupted the attainment of targets, particularly in the fourth quarter of the reporting period. The budget spent by each entity in carrying out its mandate is noted as follows: Brand SA at 96%, the DPME at 95.6%, and Stats SA at 90%.
	
	There are various reasons for the underspending, most notably the expenditure on compensation of employees. It is understandable that in some cases the budget for some projects could not be spent.
	
	The committee calls for the filling of critical posts, as the lack of human resources impacts on the organisation’s ability to carry out its mandate efficiently and effectively. Stats SA has a vacancy rate of 20.5% and has not been able to fill vacant posts since October 2016. Brand SA has a vacancy rate of 15.8%, with the DPME reporting that its vacancy rate is 11.5%.
	
	One of the concerns of the committee is the performance of the heads of departments and the high rate of acting director-generals in the public service, which must also be addressed.
	
	The committee calls for the effective monitoring of the National Development Plan (NDP) in order to evaluate the performance of government departments towards the goals set in the NDP.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATIO, MR TYOTYO JAMES.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga