Parliament, Saturday, 20 June 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Sports, Arts and Culture yesterday held a virtual meeting with Cricket South Africa (CSA) for a briefing on the performance of the organisation, including on issues of transformation and the ongoing forensic investigation.
	
	Committee Chairperson, Ms Beauty Dlulane, was concerned that the organisation, which was once regarded as a champion of transformation, was now showing signs of regression, especially with regard to women representation in management and the development of cricket in rural areas.
	
	“The issues of transformation and gender are our biggest concern, we must not compromise on transformation and we cannot keep quiet as the committee. You have been talking about assisting rural communities since the previous term of Parliament, but still you have no statistics on what has happened in rural areas in terms of cricket development,” the Chairperson said.
	
	CSA President, Mr Chris Nenzani, insisted that his organisation remains committed to transformation and that it was among the first sporting codes to drive transformation and still continues to implement transformation policy.
	
	Briefing the committee on the suspension of the CEO, Mr Thabang More, which has reportedly created an impression that CSA removed a black CEO and replaced him with an acting white CEO, Mr Nenzani said “we didn’t look at colour, we looked at efficiency – we had to suspend a CEO due to certain critical aspects which we had to subject to forensic investigation, and that process is still underway”.
	
	He also said the disciplinary process was fair and handled by external people who are not connected to CSA, and that the outcome will be processed in terms of the laws of the country.
	
	The Minister of Sports, Arts and Culture, Mr Nathi Mthethwa, told the committee that “we are committed to transformation and we want to see it happening and everybody must play a role”.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SPORTS, ARTS AND CULTURE, MS BEAUTY DLULANE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sakhile Mokoena (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 705 2130
	Email: smokoena@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo