Parliament, Tuesday 02 June 2020 – The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) held its first virtual plenary this afternoon to approve, amongst others, the 2020 Division of Revenue Bill; the ratification of two SA treaties with Bangladesh, the provisional suspension of a Pretoria chief magistrate and the removal of a Johannesburg magistrate.
	
	The 2020 Division of Revenue Bill provides for an equitable division of funds raised nationally among the national, provincial and local spheres of government, and also enable allocation of funds to fight Covid-19. The Bill also provides for determining each province’s equitable share of revenue and for any other allocations to provinces, local government or municipalities from the national government’s share of the revenue. Also specified are the conditions of those allocations. The Select Committee on Appropriations recommended that the NCOP agree to the Bill without amendments and the House agreed.
	
	Today’s plenary also considered and adopted two reports of the Select Committee on Security and Justice which recommended the removal of an additional magistrate from Johannesburg and the provisional suspension of a Pretoria Chief Magistrate. Having considered a report, tabled by the Minister of Justice and Correctional Services on 27 November 2019, on the suspension from office of Ms. I Meyburgh – in terms of section 13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No. 90 of 1993) - the Committee recommended that the NCOP resolve not to restore Ms. Meyburgh to office as Magistrate. The House adopted the Committee's recommendation.
	
	On 25 February 2020, the Minister of Justice also tabled a report informing Parliament of the provisional suspension from office of the Chief Magistrate of Pretoria, Mr. D Nair, pending the outcome of an investigation into his fitness to hold the office as Magistrate as required by section 13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act. Having considered the report from the Minister the Select Committee on Security and Justice recommended that the NCOP confirm Mr. Nair’s provisional suspension from the office of Magistrate. During today’s plenary the House confirmed Mr. Nair’s provisional suspension.
	
	The NCOP plenary also ratified two treaties between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of Bangladesh as required by section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996, which states that “an international agreement binds the Republic only after it has been approved by resolution in both the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces.” The NCOP assigned the Select Committee on Security and Justice to consider the two requests, tabled on 11 March 2020, that Parliament approves the ratification of the Extradition Treaty (and the Explanatory Memorandum to the Treaty) and the Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters (and the Explanatory Memorandum to the Treaty) between the two governments. Having considered the requests the Committee recommended that the House approves the ratification of both Treaties in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. Good Party on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape