In response to the grave spike in gender-based violence (GBV), the offices of the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly (NA), and the Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP), hosted the Father’s Day National Men’s Dialogue to engage men directly to discuss possible interventions in the fight against this (GBV) pandemic. Making opening remarks, the Deputy Speaker of the NA, Mr Lechesa Tsenoli, said the Men’s Dialogue Forum constitutes an ongoing discussion on the scourge of GBV. “We are here to continue the relay and to carry a baton that was left to us by those who came before us,” he said. He said: “We all strive for a country that is free of violence, a country in which all genders live together as equals. That is the guiding principle of our endeavours. And that is an important base for humanity. “We also need to reflect on the critical contribution that this forum will make and whether we, as men, have done and not done enough. Or, in other creative ways, we can come up with something to build on what we have achieved so far to address gender-based violence. Most importantly, we need to communicate our resolves, monitor and evaluate their effectiveness,” he added. Also making opening remarks, Mr Ntando Yola, of the South African Aids Council Men’s Sector, said today is not a happy Father’s Day because as fathers “we have a role and responsibility to contribute to society, that must be free of women abuse, in which children do not live in fear”. “In the midst of the ills we are experiencing, we all have a responsibility to make amends. To that effect, we organised men to stand against all forms of violence in our society, to ensure that men, as a collective, stand against all forms of violence against women and children,” he added. Mr Yola said to curb these atrocities, they recognised the role that Men’s Dialogue can play in society to raise some consciousness about issues affecting women and children. Mr Mash Kekana, who represented the Dads in the Picture organisation, said: “The journey we are currently undertaking is a journey that will provide some solutions. We must look at how we got to where we are today. That is where the solutions will come from. And fathers should not be purged and end up reduced to fathers who are there to provide child support grants, but they must be fathers who are actively involved in the lives of their children.” He said the grooming of the boy child at any age can contribute to the long-term intervention that could have a positive outcome later on in life. “The boy child needs to be groomed early in life for him to be a responsible father later on in life. Or are we letting the media to do the job for us?” he asked rhetorically. He emphasised this because according to him, “we as men make life options based on what we know. Sometimes we think people know when they don’t know, as a result they make uninformed decisions based on not knowing”. By Abel Mputing 21 June 2020 MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. African National Congress