Parliament, Thursday, 24 June 2020 – The Chairperson of the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Water and Sanitation and Human Settlements, Mr China Dodovu, has called for clear consequence management in errant municipalities with a negative audit outcome for the 2018/19 financial year. The Chairperson raised this opinion following the local government audit outcomes briefing by the Office of the Auditor-General to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP).
	
	Mr Dodovu highlighted that without concomitant action, the audit outcomes will not improve in the near future, something that has a direct negative impact on the ability of the municipalities to deliver quality services to the people.
	
	“There is a serious problem here. Are we going to sit with the Auditor-General again next year and raise the very same problems if there is no concomitant action taken against anybody who is responsible for the financial mess in the municipalities? Last year, the same problems where raised, and amongst them is the deteriorating accountability and lack of consequence management, a point that is highlighted today. If we don’t put a stop to this, next year we are going to face the same problems,” Mr Dodovu said.
	
	Mr Dodovu highlighted that in most municipalities that are under administration through section 139 of the Constitution, the situation continues to deteriorate despite the interventions.
	
	As a result, Mr Dodovu has called for the Auditor-General to utilise the prescripts of the Public Audit Amendment Act in all errant municipalities and not only nine municipalities as suggested by the Auditor-General.
	
	The Chairperson has also criticised the continued use of consultants by municipalities, especially those under administration. “This means that we are paying for administrators and the group of skilled staff they bring in, as well as for consultants, but we are not getting value for the money invested. This can be brought to an end by effective and speedy consequence management,” Mr Dodovu said.
	
	The Select Committee will urgently meet and discuss the report and will make recommendations to the NCOP as a way of finding solutions to the continuing worrying trend of negative audits.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, WATER, SANITATION AND HUMAN SETTLEMENTS, MR CHINA DODOVU.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape