The Department of Public Service and Administration (DPSA), and the National School of Government (NSG) today briefed Parliament’s Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration about the different youth skills development programmes that they offer. In a virtual meeting, members of the committee warned the department and the school to guard against the public service internship and skills development programmes contributing to the already bloated public sector wage bill. The DPSA and the NSG briefed the committee about the different internship, learnership and artisan programmes provided by the public sector to empower unemployed youth. Committee member, Ms Mina Lesoma, advised the department and the NSG to engage the private sector to absorb some of the young people who graduate through the public sector’s learnership and internship programmes. “I hope the whole programme is not intending to contradict government’s intentions of managing the public sector wage bill, which is already bloated, and it would be advisable for the DPSA to engage the public sector to look at the possibility of absorbing some of these young people,” said Ms Lesoma. Responding to the member’s concerns, the Director-General (DG) of the DPSA, Ms Yoliswa Makhasa, acknowledged that there was expectation from young people who go through the programmes that they would be employed. “There is expectation out there from the youth and parents, but the reality is that the system is not capable to absorb everybody, we are careful of the bloating public service, these programmes are aimed at giving training and confidence to the youth to go and look for jobs elsewhere,” said the DG. The Minister of the DPSA, Mr Senzo Mchunu, told the committee that the situation in the country has changed since these interventions were initiated and there would be a need for readjustments. “At the time when these injunctions were made, and the reasons behind them, they were commendable but we have come to a point where we have got to adapt because of the kind of exposures that we are now in, in this era. “It would be necessary to adjust as the government and the country get more exposed to situations that were not there when these objectives were initiated, we still stand committed to young people, but we have to adjust so that we keep on surviving the turbulence that we are going through for some time now,” said the Minister. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Tyotyo James, said the “plethora (large amount) of youth development policies and programmes must contribute to achieving the objectives of building an efficient public service”. He further urged the department and the NSG to ensure all government departments prioritise the youth of this country, particularly for entry level positions. Another major concern for committee members is the inadequate recruitment of people with disabilities for both learnership and employment in the public service, which still stands at the legislated 2%. Members advised that the department must engage special schools for people with disabilities to see which of their skills can be further developed in the public sector. The Principal of the NSG, Prof Busani Ngcaweni, briefed the committee about the orientation and training the school has provided to unemployed graduates and interns through the Breaking Barriers to Entry into the Public Service (BB2E) programme over the last 10 years. He said the aim of the programme is to prepare unemployed graduates to access employment opportunities in the public service by increasing their knowledge of the public service and how it works, as well as providing some basic skills in reading, writing, completing application forms, preparing and participating in a job interview. By Sakhile Mokoena 11 June 2020 The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”. African National Congress