Parliament, Wednesday, 3 June 2020 - Parliament is scheduled to host its third leg of the virtual Provincial Review Sessions of the 1994 Women Charter focusing on the Pixle ka Seme Municipality tomorrow, Thursday, 4 June 2020.
	
	The Women’ Charter Review Sessions are aimed at taking stock of progress made in implementing the articles of the 1994 Women’s Charter for Effective Equality and also assess its impact since the dawn of democracy.
	
	So far, three of the five district municipalities in the province (ZF Magcawu, Frances Baard and John Taolo) have held virtual consultative sessions. The intensive consultation process will culminate in the adoption of improved policy and legislative oversight mechanisms, and interventions aimed at removing all structural, institutional and cultural barriers to the realisation of gender equality in South Africa.
	
	Details of the event are as follows: 
	Date: Thursday, 04 June 2020
	Venue: Video Platform
	Time: 15:00
	
	Members of the media who wish to interview the leader of delegation, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Ms Sylvia Lucas can contact Mr Manelisi Ntsodo on 081 716 2021.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow the virtual session live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408) and via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. African National Congress on the National List