To download soundbite of Parliament Spokesperson Moloto Mothapo follow this link: https://iono.fm/e/875444
	
	Parliament, Friday 12 June 2020 – On 21 February, Speaker of the National Assembly (NA) Ms Thandi Modise received a notice of substantive motion, from Democratic Alliance Chief Whip Ms Natasha Mazzone, proposing that Parliament initiates a process aimed at removing from office Public Protector Advocate Busisiwe Mkhwebane. The notice was found to be in line with the Constitution and the NA Rules and the process to appoint the Independent Panel was then started.
	
	The purpose of the Panel is to conduct a preliminary assessment about whether there is prima facie evidence to show that Advocate Mkhwebane has committed the misconduct alleged in the motion and/or is incompetent for the reasons alleged in the motion.
	
	The Rules specify that the Panel must comprise three fit and proper South African citizens who, collectively, possess the necessary legal and other competencies and experience to conduct the preliminary assessment. If a judge is appointed to the Panel, the Speaker must make such an appointment in consultation with the Chief Justice. One of the panellists must be appointed chairperson of the Panel. The Panel must complete its assessment and report, which must include recommendations with reasons and any minority views of panellists, to the NA within 30 days of its formal appointment.
	
	In determining whether there is prima facie evidence to sustain the motion’s complaints, the Panel may, in its sole discretion, provide any NA member with an opportunity to place written or recorded information before it within a specified timeframe. The Panel must, without delay, provide the incumbent with copies of all information available to it relating to the assessment. It must also provide the incumbent with a reasonable opportunity to respond in writing to the relevant allegations against her. The Panel may not hold oral hearings and will be limited to an assessment of the record before it.
	
	Once the Panel has made its recommendations, the Speaker must schedule these for decision by the NA. If the NA decides the inquiry should go ahead, it must be referred to a special section 194 committee for formal inquiry.
	
	Before the business of the NA was briefly suspended because of the National State of Disaster, the Speaker had requested parties to nominate preferred persons to serve on the Panel by 6 March. Having considered the nominations by the parties, the Speaker has, in terms of the Rules, selected three fit and proper persons who, she is confident, collectively possess the necessary legal and other competencies and experience to conduct the preliminary assessment.
	
	Letters of invitation to serve on the Panel have been sent to the three persons. In addition to indicating their availability to serve on the Panel, they have also been asked to indicate if they believe the process over which they will preside is possible, within the current COVID-19 restrictions.
	
	If all the responses are positive, Ms Modise will make the appointments. If all the responses are not positive then, depending on the issues raised, she will either hold over the appointments until a later date or take steps aimed at the appointment of other person(s) to the Panel.
	
	The names of the Panel members will be announced once the process of appointment is concluded.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng