Parliament, Thursday, 11 June 2020 – Parliament’s virtual consultations on the provincial review sessions of the 1994 Women Charter move to Free State province tomorrow, Friday 12 June.
	
	The first leg of the Free State sessions will be held virtually with Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality. The sessions are a continuation of the nationwide consultation process to ensure that the Women’s Charter is strengthened and is reflective of the views of women in South Africa. The Free State province is the third province to be consulted following successful sessions in the Western Cape and the Northern Cape.
	
	The intensive consultation process will culminate in the adoption of improved policy and legislative oversight mechanisms, and interventions aimed at removing all structural, institutional and cultural barriers to the realisation of gender equality in South Africa.
	
	Details of the event are as follows: 
	Date: Friday, 12 June 2020
	Venue: Virtual platform
	Time: 15:00
	
	Members of the media who wish to interview the leader of delegation, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Ms Sylvia Lucas can contact Nolizwi Magwagwa on 081 716 5824.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow the virtual session live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408) and via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of North West