Parliament, Wednesday 17 June 2020 – The National Assembly (NA) has during its plenary sitting today approved the provisional suspension of a Bloemfontein regional Magistrate from office and further adopted three Treaties.
	
	The National Assembly has approved the report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
	Correctional Services on the provisional suspension from office of Mr LT Mkansi, a Bloemfontein Regional Magistrate. Mr Mkansi was appointed to the position on 1 December 2013. The Magistrates’ Commission charged Mr Mkansi based on prima facie evidence that on numerous occasions he had communicated on his cellular phone with an accused person who appeared before him in the criminal court on 24 counts of fraud.
	
	On 7 October 2019, Mr Mkansi was invited to furnish the Commission with representations indicating why the Commission should not recommend that he be provisionally suspended from office without remuneration. Having considered his representations; the seriousness of the allegations levelled against him, and the interests of the image of the judiciary, the Commission resolved to recommend that Mr Mkansi be provisionally suspended from office in terms of section 13(3) (a) of the Act. Having considered the Magistrates Commission’s report, tabled by the Minister for Justice and Correctional Services, the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services recommended that the National Assembly confirm the provisional suspension from office of Mr Mkansi pending the outcome of an investigation into his fitness to hold office as a Magistrate.
	
	Also on the agenda before the National Assembly this afternoon, was the consideration of Treaties. The House has approved South Africa’s accession to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in South East Asia. The Asian treaty will contribute to the eradication of tariffs between member states, which will, in turn, lead to the reduction of prices and the opening of more investment opportunities.
	
	The House further approved the Treaties between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United Mexican States on Extradition and on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution. These Treaties will enable both South Africa and the United Mexican States to assist each other in the investigation and prosecution of crimes through mutual legal assistance and the extradition of fugitives.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICAEnquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. African National Congress