Parliament, Wednesday, 24 June 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs will tomorrow, 25 June 2020, receive a briefing from the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC) on the impact of the Constitutional Court ruling that declared the Electoral Act 73 of 1998 unconstitutional.
	
	The ruling will obviously have repercussions on the electoral system and processes already in place at the IEC to run a credible election.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Adv Bongani Bongo, emphasised the need for the committee together with the Department of Home Affairs and the IEC to earnestly consider the implications of the ruling on the systems and funding, in order to make informed decisions.
	
	Details of the meeting
	Date: Thursday, 25 June 2020
	Time: 18:00
	Venue: Virtual meeting
	
	Parliamentary Committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, ADV BONGANI BONGO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape