Parliament, Tuesday, 16 June 2020 - The National Assembly will hold a hybrid sitting to commemorate youth day tomorrow, 17 June.
	
	The National Assembly’s Youth Day debate, scheduled for 15h00, is themed “Youth Power- Growing South Africa together in a time of Covid-19”.
	
	The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) is scheduled to meet and plan the business of its House tomorrow at 09h00, via a virtual platform. Amongst issues to be discussed by the Programming Committee are the forthcoming plenaries of the House, committee reports and Bills before the House.
	
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the Youth Day Debate in the National Assembly Chamber should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: mmpindi@parlaiment.gov.za no later than TOMORROW, 17 June at 12:00.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings and Parliament debates live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICAEnquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”. African National Congress