Parliament, Monday, 8 June 2020 - Parliament is scheduled to host its last leg of the virtual Provincial Review Sessions of the 1994 Women Charter in the Northern Cape at the Namakwa District Municipality tomorrow, Tuesday, 9 June 2020.
	
	The Women’ Charter Review Sessions are aimed at taking stock of progress made in implementing the articles of the 1994 Women’s Charter for Effective Equality and also assess its impact since the dawn of democracy.
	
	In all, four district municipalities have held virtual sessions in the Province. The intensive consultation process will culminate in the adoption of improved policy and legislative oversight mechanisms, and interventions aimed at removing all structural, institutional and cultural barriers to the realisation of gender equality in South Africa.
	
	Details of the event are as follows: 
	Date: Tuesday, 09 June 2020
	Venue: Virtual platform
	Time: 15:00
	
	Members of the media who wish to interview the leader of delegation, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Ms Sylvia Lucas can contact Mlindi Mpindi on 081 716 7329.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow the virtual session live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408) and via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng