Parliament, Friday, 19 June 2020 – The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) is concerned about the pace with which the prosecution of cases involving fraud, corruption and maladministration of the public purse is moving.
	
	The committee this morning received a briefing from the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) in relation to the investigations involving the Department of Water and Sanitation. The committee plans to interact with the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) to ascertain what could be done to ensure the acceleration of prosecutions.
	
	The committee was informed that the SIU had to resort to the use of a search and seizure proclamation in order to obtain information on the LTE Consulting contract awarded by the Lepelle Northern Water Board. It is unfortunate that the SIU has to resort to such measures which indicate a deliberate effort to frustrate the process of investigation.
	
	Also, the committee welcomes the fact that the SIU is taking steps to investigate the officials even after they have resigned and moved to other departments or entities within the state as well as those who have left the employ of the state. The report of the SIU will form the basis of the work of the committee as it interrogates how the department was bankrupted by mismanagement.
	
	The SIU has also referred a number of reports to the Presidency. Furthermore, the committee is interested to know how those reports have informed the successful prosecution of cases.
	
	Also, it has welcomed the progress made by Eskom in relation to the recommendations the committee made after its oversight visit to Medupi and Kusile power stations as well as to the power utility itself.
	
	The Minister of Public Enterprises, Mr Pravin Gordan and Eskom’s Chief Executive Officer, Mr André de Ruyter, appeared before the committee yesterday, in a virtual meeting, to brief the committee on the report dealing with the committee’s recommendations to the power utility.
	
	The progress made by Eskom addresses some of the challenges faced by the power utility that include liquidity, leadership and governance issues, as well as operational challenges such as shortages and quality of coal and power outages. The committee appreciates the consistency of Eskom’s report with the recommendations it made after that visit. The committee has, however, requested the power utility to submit a report of the special counsel on the allegations leveled against its Chief Operations Officer. Furthermore, the committee has also requested Eskom to submit a detailed report on the amounts that the power utility intends to recover from those who have defrauded it. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SCOPA, MR MKHULEKO HLENGWA. For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape