Parliament, Wednesday 24 June 2020 – Deputy President Mr David Mabuza is scheduled to provide answers to Questions for Oral Reply during the National Assembly hybrid plenary sitting tomorrow, Thursday, 25 June 2020.
	
	The six questions the Deputy President will reply to cover numerous issues of national importance that include plans for the long-term sustainability of Eskom, the COVID – 19 pandemic, and other related matters.
	
	DETAILS OF THE HYBRID SITTING ARE AS FOLLOWS:
	
	Date: Thursday, 25 June 2020
	Time: 14.00
	Venue: National Assembly Chamber, Parliament, and online Platform
	
	To access all the questions to the Deputy President please click: https://www.parliament.gov.za/storage/app/media/Docs/quest_pap/711fdc1c-57aa-4eed-99f3-1db621561902.pdf
	
	The National Council of Provinces (NCOP), on the other hand, will during its completely hybrid sitting tomorrow receive a progress report from the Minister of Basic Education, Ms Angie Motshekga - accompanied by the nine (9) provincial MEC’s for Education, on the re-opening of schools and measures in place to curb the spread of Covid-19 in schools. The briefing will start at 13h00 on virtual platforms.
	
	Important to note:
	
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the National Assembly Hybrid Sitting should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: Mmpindi@parlaiment.gov.za no later than TOMORROW, Thursday, 25 June at 9am.
	
	Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliamentary precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of North West