Parliament, Monday 29 June 2020 – The National Assembly (NA) will hold a hybrid plenary tomorrow to debate on a matter of national public importance while the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will host Questions for Oral Reply by the Peace and Security Cluster.
	
	The Debate in the NA, titled: “The scourge of gender-based violence against women and femicide” will be led by Ms NV Mente from the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF). The plenary will also consider reports from Committees, amongst them, the Portfolio Committees on Justice and Correctional Services; Basic Education; and Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs.
	
	Details of the NA plenary are as follows:
	
	Date: Tuesday, 30 June 2020
	Time: 14:00
	Venue: Virtual platforms and the National Assembly Chamber
	
	Meanwhile, the NCOP will hold its completely virtual plenary on Questions for Oral Reply from the Ministers in Cluster 1 – Peace and Security. This Cluster comprises the Department of Defence and Military Veterans, Home Affairs, International Relations and Cooperation, Justice and Correctional Services, Police and State Security.
	
	Details of the NCOP plenary are as follows:
	
	Date: Tuesday, 30 June 2020
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: Virtual platforms
	
	Important to note:
	
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the National Assembly Hybrid Sitting should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: Mmpindi@parlaiment.gov.za.
	
	Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliamentary precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng