The National Assembly hosted the Appropriation Bill debate today. Some MPs believed the Bill is a step in a right direction in addressing the economic challenges of the recession, slow growth, shrinking tax revenue and rising demands for service delivery. However, others said the Bill has been rendered a blunt instrument in light of the Covid-19 pandemic. Leading the debate, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Appropriations, Mr Sfiso Buthelezi, started off by paying tribute to the youth of 1976. “This far no further, this must stop even if they have to pay the ultimate price. They said loud and clear black lives matter.” He then hailed the symbiotic relation between the budget tabled by the Minister of Finance before Parliament earlier this year. “This noble budget continues with the noble cause of our government’s prioritisation of service delivery as the leading priority of its developmental agenda. We dedicate the ethical agenda of this budget that seeks to create a better South Africa for all to the youth of 1976.” He called for stern action against wide-spread under-expenditure in the face of infrastructure and service delivery backlogs, as well as wasteful expenditure. He also identified poor project management as a costly anomaly that needs to be addressed if we are to manage state funds effectively. He congratulated the Congress of South African Trade Union (Cosatu) in its bid to convert Eskom Public Investment Corporation’s debt into equity. “That will make workers part of the management of Eskom. Most of all, it will reduce its debt, shore up its balance sheet.” He had a word for those who disapproved Cosatu’ initiative. “When billions of government workers’ money was lost in Steinhoff, Toggat-Hullet cases and other private transactions no noises where made. Why now.” Cosatu’s initiative will play a critical role in the revival of South Africa’s economy, he said. “It will save jobs and make Eskom a viable entity again.” In his concluding remark, he reiterated: “We owe a lot the youth of this country to give them their economic citizenship, who paid the ultimate price to show that, indeed, black lives matter.” The Democratic Alliance’s position was voiced by Mr Geordin Hill-Lewis, who said: “Every day, I speak to South Africans whose lives are ruined by the lock down. Many face hardship, with little support from government. Even the R350 grant that was promised has not has been paid out to those eligible for it. These are real people, facing real challenges and their lives matter too. But why does government act as if their lives don’t matter.” Those who have a duty to care have not shown a duty to care, he claimed. “Government must implement a home grown-strategy to grow the economy. But also we must let go the inclination that the state must do everything. This lock down has shown that the state cannot do what it set out to do.” We can pull back from the precipice that our economy is faced with “if we come up with our own home grown economic strategy, he said. The bill gives departments the legal frame work to spend the budgets allocated to them, but “we have to take note of the fact that we are dealing with a budget that has reduced the budget of municipalities who are at coal face of service delivery, said Ms Veronica Mente, of the Economic Freedom Fighters. When this budget was tabled, the world was different, there was no pandemic. “For instance, the bill allocated money for tourism and arts programmes, which are now prohibited. This makes this bill irrelevant.” She lamented the fact that the stimulus package to shore up the economy against the pandemic was presented as a new monetary policy, when in actual fact “it was not but a reprioritisation of the budget. We still have not seen the readjusted budget that will speak to the order of the day: the pandemic,” she said. “There is no indication that such a request is taken seriously.” It appears that there is a plan when there is no plan, she further stated. “What we are doing today has no material substance and is a waste of time. We want a budget that speaks to the current reality of Covid-19.” Next up was the Inkatha Freedom Party, represented by Mr Mkhuleko Hlengwa, who pointed out that in addition to Covid-19, South Africa is also dealing with the economic challenges arising from corruption and state looting .Let’s do the right thing to support the bill, but we must recognise the fact that “the crisis before us is not only a financial crisis,” we are also faced with policy and ethical challenges, he stated. The idea to come up with a new airline is a case in point, he said. Mr Wouter Wessels of the Freedom Front Plus believes that the Bill, did not take into account that our economy was faced with a downgrade from rating agencies and does not take into consideration the continued looting of state coffers has left the fiscus with no reserves. “Don’t blame virus for all our economic challenges, blame the virus of looting,” he said. Who have thought we would be facing the pandemic today, Mr Steven Swart of the African Christian Democratic Party asked rhetorically. Sadly, “the bill is irrelevant given the change of the fiscus situation has changed because of Covid-19”. The special budget to be tabled before Parliament by the Minister of Finance must be forward-looking. And we can’t allow is to be used to pursue narrow policies. The National Treasury must ensure that “the Covid-19 expenditure that will be pronounced in the adjusted budget is audited to ensure that government will be a good steward of state funds, instead of lining the pocket of those who are politically connected,” Mr Swart concluded. Let’s learn from history and “leave no room for corruption and to ensure that the departments spent their funds efficiently,” said Mr Shaun August of the Good Party. The next budget to be tabled before Parliament should ensure that its favours the poor, because they are the one affected by the pandemic, he added. In his view, “our decision today will have an impact on our trajectory “to our response to Covid-19, job creation and infrastructure development.” I am deeply hurt that we are standing here in a midst of crisis of 100 lives that have been lost in the country thus far, said Mr Ahmed Munzoor Shaik Emam of the National Freedom Party. “We know there is a crisis and we would not have enough beds, but instead of confronting what we are faced with as a united nation, we come here to attach each other.” “We have allowed for the resale of alcohol and now we are faced with high number of trauma casualties at our hospitals due to alcohol-related incidents. This means the Covid-19 patients won’t be accommodated at our hospitals due to this decision. That is what we should be focusing on, how this budget to address these ongoing challenges.” Patriotism is very low. “We are still waiting on corrupt politicians to be brought to book,” said Mr Ganief Hendricks of Al Jama-a. He added, “As we pass this Bill, we must make sure our money is not captured.” And as parliamentarians “we can’t give money and stand back. We must play an act role as Parliament conduct oversight and we must do better than other Parliaments that came before us,” he said. The Minister of Finance, Mr Tito Mboweni, said that National Treasury appreciates the work done by the appropriation committees and others that deal with money bills. “Your contribution to this debate of national significant is invaluable.” “We pass this Bill,” he pointed out, “knowing very well that we will return on June 24 for a supplementary budget occasioned by recent development in our society and the globe. What has changed, in our country’s economic outlook, is that “… our economy has gone into recession. Tax collection and revenue declined sharply.” What has become clear, noted the minister, is that “We thought we were rich, but we are no longer rich as we thought we were. We have to adapt to a new situation of a declining economy. What this means is that we must go back to zero-budgeting, to refocus our growth activities, not take the base line of yesteryear as a base line for an in coming year. That is what zero budgeting means.” He urged the Members of Parliament to research the modalities of zero-budgeting so they become familiar with it. He promised that the readjusted budget that will be tabled before Parliament will have a direct bearing on the new developments brought about by the pandemic. Abel Mputing
	12 June 2020 Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. African National Congress