Ordinary men in the street and leaders in communities across racial lines in the False Bay area of the City of Cape Town, who Insession writer, Mava Lukani, talked to on the eve of the Men’s Dialogue which is going to take place virtually tomorrow, agree that everybody in South Africa knows that the government has the capacity to prevent what is dangerous to the people of this country. They said it is not by a heavenly miracle that the government flattens the curve of a very fast and sophisticated coronavirus. It is, they added, by putting together scientific and strident strategies to curb the spread of the coronavirus pandemic. Mr Paul Ferrera of Somerset said: “The government knows that the source of the problem of domestic violence, gender-based violence (GBV), theft, house robberies and so on, is substance abuse.” He added that clearly if the government is able to deal successfully with coronavirus, it can deal with gender-based violence successfully. Mr Gorahd Peterson of Macassar Township said: “The government created regulations with speed to fight the spread of the coronavirus pandemic and has done that successfully, there are strong laws in South Africa to fight whatever type of violence that emerges. The government fails to apply the laws of the country. They must apply the laws that are there. That Men’s Parliament is not going to assist, I am not optimistic in that regard Sir.” Mr Aristole Labo said: “I am a refugee in South Africa and I have been here for some years. South Africans have abandoned everything to the government and the hands of the government are full. It depends on all South Africans to stop all forms of violence, including the xenophobic one. As long as South Africans leave the issue of solving the problem of violence to the government, it is going to worsen instead of flattening.” National Assembly Deputy Speaker, Mr Lechesa Tsenoli, and National Council of Provinces Deputy Chairperson, Ms Sylvia Lucas, will host a virtual Father’s Day Men’s Dialogue tomorrow themed: “Fathers Speak to Heal the Nation”.
	
	This dialogue is going to be held in partnership with the Department of Social Development and the South African National Aids Council Men’s Sector – and aims to discuss, among other things, the role of men towards a healthy nation and the creation of  an environment that is conducive and safe for children to grow in and thrive. One of the objectives of the Men’s Dialogue is to ensure that men are mobilised to take a stand against GBV and ensure that they make a strong and loud voice against the scourge of GBV, call upon all men to come together in a united front and instil new norms and values in men, of embracing women and children and to be driven by these values at all levels where they interact with women, at home, in the streets, in their communities, at work and everywhere else. The outcomes of the dialogue include the launch of Ebuhlanti TV Shows on GBV and to partner with Patrick Shai of Khulumandoda, Soweto TV and the Department of Social Development initiatives, to use the dialogue as a platform for launching an online district Men’s Parliament and introduce the entire concept to all the stakeholders. The South African National Aids Council (SANAC) Men’s Sector, in partnership with the Department of Social Development, coordinates the implementation of Takuwani Riime and #MenChampioningChange Programme. The coordination is to ensure that the goals and objectives outlined in the five-year National Strategic Plan on HIV, TB & STIs (NSP) 2017 – 2022 are realised. “Takuwani Riime” Men’s Movement is one of the numerous such contributions that are led by the Men’s Sector of SANAC. By Mava Lukani 20 June 2020 The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng