Parliament, Wednesday, 3 June 2020 – The Select Committee on Land Reform, Environment, Mineral Resources had a joint meeting with the nine provincial legislatures and the South African Local Government Association (Salga). The meeting received a briefing from the Department of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries on the National Forest Amendment Bill.
	
	The Bill seeks to amend the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No. 84 of 1998). The purpose of the National Forests Act, 1998, is to promote the sustainable management and development of forests, and provide for the protection of certain forests and trees. The objectives of the Bill are to: The meeting welcomed the report, but expressed concern on areas not addressed in the Bill. For example, the Constitution respects traditional beliefs. Therefore, the Bill needs to consider these to allow traditional healers to do their work. The inclusion of stakeholders, such as traditional leaders and healers, must be clearly specified in the Bill. Forests on traditional land need must also be addressed in the amendments, in addition to how healers should function. Furthermore, people with disabilities must be included in the Bill. Young people and woman are mentioned, but it is equally important to include people with disabilities. In addition, to contribute to development, the Bill must position rural constituencies in line with community forests. Regarding forest officers, the select committee said it must be given an opportunity to see the powers of these officers. The meeting welcomed the proposed amendments stipulating that there will be no prospective mining in forests, which is long overdue. However, the crucial importance of public participation in processing the Bill was raised, so that Parliament is not found wanting with the law. Committee members were given an opportunity to make further submissions on the Bill. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON LAND REFORM, ENVIRONMENT, MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MS TEBOGO MODISE For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng