The Chief Whip of the Majority Party, Ms Pammy Majodina, tabled a motion in a hybrid sitting of the National Assembly (NA) yesterday noting that the term of office of the Auditor-General (AG) is due to end on 30 November 2020. Ms Majodina said the NA must establish an ad hoc committee on the appointment of the Auditor-General according to its Rule 253(1) (a). The committee must nominate a person according to section 193 of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa to be appointed to fill the vacancy when the current AG’s tenure expires. The committee should consist of 11 members of the NA. Six of them should come from the majority party, the African National Congress; two from the official opposition, the Democratic Alliance; one from the Economic Freedom Fighters and two from other parties in the NA combined. The hybrid plenary sitting agreed to establish the committee that would report on its work to the NA by 31 August 2020. In carrying out its work the committee would be guided by the Constitution, legislation and applicable rules of the NA. According to section 193 of the Constitution, the Public Protector and the members of any Commission established by this Chapter must be women or men who are South African citizens; fit and proper persons to hold the particular office; and comply with any other requirements prescribed by national legislation. The AG must be a woman or a man who is a South African citizen and a fit and proper person to hold that office. Specialised knowledge of, or experience in, auditing, state finances and public administration must be given due regard in appointing the Auditor-General. The President, on the recommendation of the NA must appoint the Public Protector, the Auditor-General and the members of the South African Human Rights Commission; the Commission for Gender Equality; and the Electoral Commission. Mava Lukani
	10 June 2020 Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs. African National Congress