Parliament, Thursday, 25 June 2020 – During a meeting on its quarterly report today, the National Conventional Arms Control Committee (NCACC) was questioned by the Joint Standing Committee on Defence about reports that military hardware had been exported to Turkey in May 2020, and the possibility that these might end up in Libya.
	
	The Chairperson of the NCACC, Minister Jackson Mthembu, said the matter was raised with the NCACC last week, who have no previous knowledge of military hardware destined for Libya. The committee was told that the NCACC has requested a report from the Ministers responsible for the Department of International Relations and Cooperation (Dirco), the National Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee and the Department of Defence (DOD).
	
	Minister Mthembu said the sale and use of military weapons are guided by international protocol, and also by South African regulations that military hardware is not to be sold to countries involved in conflicts. Minister Mthembu further told the committee that “countries that we interact with in good faith should not do anything that has not been agreed on”.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Cyril Xaba, welcomes and shares the view that it is in the best interest of South Africa to ensure that those who have been sold military hardware to, abide by the terms of the agreement.
	
	The committee welcomes the progress made to ensure the finalisation of the amendments to the National Conventional Arms Control Regulations, specifically the regulations relating to the end-user certificates. The amended regulations allow end-users to agree to on-site verification of controlled items arranged through a diplomatic process. As per the committee’s request, details on requests for transfer of weapons or military components from one country to another will be made available.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSONS OF THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE, MR CYRIL XABA AND MR ELLECK NCHABELENG.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 063 503 2364
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga