Parliament, Wednesday, 17 June 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans commended the office of the South African Military Ombud on its work but reminded it that its founding legislation requires it to perform its duties without fear, favour, bias or prejudice. This legislation affords this office the necessary protection and sufficient guarantees against interference or victimisation.
	
	This follows the view of the Military Ombud, Lt Gen (Ret) Vusumuzi Masondo, that some of the recommendations given to the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) might be difficult to implement.
	
	Mr Xaba said the position of the Military Ombud is pitched at a level of the High Court judge and that law provides that whoever is aggrieved by his decision, may take it on review in the High Court. In light of these, the recommendations of the Military Ombud do not depend on whether the SANDF is happy with them or not, as long as it is an appropriate relief upon the consideration of the facts, Mr Xaba said.
	
	The committee is concerned about the funding implications on the mandate and functioning of the institution. This follows the revelation that the funding allocation does not fulfil the requirement with regards to the number of staffed posts and the fact that most of the budget is spent on the cost of employees, thus leaving little for operational costs.
	
	The committee questioned the institution on several issues and asked that these be responded to in writing. These issues include, amongst others, the financial implication of the cases carried over to the following financial year, the prioritisation of complaints received from the general public and those from members in uniform, and the measures in which the Military Ombud plans on dealing with recommendations not implemented by the SANDF, that is, unresolved cases.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS, MR CYRIL XABA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 063 503 2364
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng