Parliament, Sunday 28 June 2020 –  A Debate on Gender Based Violence, Questions to the Peace and Security Ministers and the consideration of Committee reports are among issues on the programme of Parliament for this last week of the Second Term.
	
	The continued fight against Gender-Based Violence will take centre stage this week as the National Assembly (NA) hybrid plenary will, on Tuesday, debate a matter of public national importance titled: “The scourge of gender-based violence against women and femicide.” The debate will be followed by considerations of reports from various Portfolio Committees.
	
	The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will, also on Tuesday, host a virtual plenary sitting where Permanent Delegates to the House will get Oral Replies to their questions from Ministers in the Peace and Security Cluster. This Cluster comprises of the Department of Defence and Military Veterans, Home Affairs, International Relations and Cooperation, Justice and Correctional Services, Police and State Security.
	
	Parliament uses a range of instruments to hold the Executive accountable as Section 92(2) of the Constitution stipulates that Cabinet Members are accountable collectively and individually to Parliament for the exercise of powers and performance of their functions.
	
	At least 12 Committee Meetings of both houses of Parliament, the NA and the NCOP, are scheduled to take place virtually from Tuesday to Friday as follows:
	
	TUESDAY, 30 JUNE
	
	Standing Committee on Finance and SC on Finance: Briefing by the PBO and Financial and Fiscal Commission on 2020 Revised Fiscal Framework
	
	PC on Women, Youth and People with Disabilities/ (Joint-Sub Committee on the filling of vacancies in NYDA): Consideration of committee programme & criteria for shortlisting in Gauteng
	
	PC on Basic Education: Briefing from the Minister of Basic Education on the impact and status of schooling during the COVID-19 Lockdown + School COVID-19 compliance measures and challenges
	
	PC on Basic Education/SC on Education and Technology, Sports, Arts and Culture: Consideration and Adoption of Draft Minutes and Draft Reports; •Briefing by the Department of Basic Education on an Update and Status Report on the Impact of COVID-19 and Lockdown on School + COVID-19 School Compliance measures, challenges and mitigations.
	
	PC on Justice and Correctional Services: 1. Progress report on investigations by the Special Investigating Unit into matters referred to it concerning the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development; 2. Briefing on mechanisms in place to facilitate co-operation between the Special Investigating Unit and National Prosecuting Authority; 3. Briefing on the operationalisation of the Protection of Information Act and capacitation/resourcing of the Information Regulator; 4. Briefing on preparation for the transfer of Promotion of Access to Information Act powers and functions to the information Regulator.
	
	WEDNESDAY, 01 JULY
	
	Standing Committee on Finance and SC on Finance: Public hearings on the 2020 Revised Fiscal Framework
	
	Joint-Sub Committee on the filling of vacancies in NYDA: Short-listing of the candidates for NYDA
	
	THURSDAY, 02 JULY
	
	Joint-Sub Committee on the filling of vacancies in NYDA: Short-listing of the candidates for NYDA
	
	PC on Sports, Arts and Culture: Briefings by Department of Sports, Arts and Culture on the revised budget
	
	FRIDAY, 03 JULY
	
	Standing Committee on Finance and SC on Finance: Response by National Treasury to the public submissions on the 2020 Revised Fiscal Framework
	
	Joint-Sub Committee on the filling of vacancies in NYDA: Short-listing of the candidates for NYDA
	
	PC on Basic Education/SC on Education and Technology, Sports, Arts and Culture: Consideration and Adoption of Draft Minutes and Draft Reports; Interaction with the Department of Basic Education on proposed allocations and possible adjustments
	
	Parliamentary meetings have thus far been held all days of the week, including some weekends and public holidays, due to a huge load of oversight and legislative work that is before Parliament.
	
	For a full list of the Committees, visit Parliament’s website www.parliament.gov.za
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email: mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA 
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament. African National Congress