Parliament, Monday, 1 June 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities reiterated the important role played by the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) particularly during this difficult time.
	
	The committee expressed concern over the financial constraints under which the Commission operates and also commended it for its prudent management of finances and its pursuit of strategic partnerships in order to give effect to its mandate.
	
	The CGE briefed the committee recently in a virtual meeting on its Annual Performance Plan for 2020/21, Strategic Plan and Budget for 2020-2024.
	
	The committee emphasised the crucial role of the Commissioners although that is not articulated strongly enough in the strategic and annual performance plans of the Commission. Also, the committee recommended that the role of the Commissioners must be clearly outlined.
	
	The committee acknowledged that law and policy reform and submissions by the CGE in this regard was key, however, it was of the view that attending meetings in Parliament in an effort to influence policy direction is not sufficient.
	
	The committee questioned the CGE on what it has done on the cultural practise of Ukuthwala (forced marriages) which is used in certain rural communities. Furthermore, it told the Commission that the practise violates the rights of young girls and needs to be abolished.
	
	On issues relating to persons with disabilities, the committee said support material needs to be made disability friendly so that it is accessible as well as available in different languages.
	
	The committee asked the CGE whether the access it wanted to the documents was granted, in order for it to compile a report on its monitoring and evaluation targets that are contained in its APP, as it reported in the previous committee meetings the difficulties it had with the Interim Steering Committee on gender-based violence and femicide.
	
	The committee commended the CGE on its improved performance over the last five years and noted with appreciation the increase of public awareness about the programmes of the Commission. Based on its satisfaction about the performance of the Commission, the committee has indicated its support for motivation for the provision of additional financial resources to the CGE to ensure that it carries on with its good work.
	
	The CGE will come again at a time to be determined by the committee to brief the committee on programmes that will include programmes on men and boys.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WOMEN, YOUTH AND PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES, MS NONHLANHLA NCUBE-NDABA
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact:
	Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape