Parliament, Thursday 25 June 2020 – National Council of Provinces Deputy Chairperson, Ms Sylvia Lucas and National Assembly Deputy Speaker, Mr Lechesa Tsenoli, will host a Hybrid Youth Parliament on Friday 26 June, focusing on youth economic issues exacerbated by the Covid-19 pandemic.
	
	About 180 young people, including Members of Parliament (MPs), Members of the Provincial Legislatures (MPLs), Metropolitans and Districts Councilors (Cllrs), as well as youth formations across the country and civil society, are expected to participate in the Youth Parliament under the theme: “Youth Power – Growing South Africa together in a time of Covid-19”.
	
	The Youth Parliament will deliberate on issues which include accelerating the youth economic agenda during and post Covid-19, barriers to youth participation and employment, the overall youth development agenda for the sixth parliament. This Youth Parliament will also provide young MPs, MPLs and Cllrs the opportunity to institutionalise oversight and accountability structures across the three spheres of government, to enable targeted responses to youth empowerment.
	
	The Youth Parliament will take place as follows:
	
	Date: 26 June 2020
	Time: 09h00 – 14h00
	Venue: Virtual video Platform and National Assembly Chamber, Parliament
	
	Media attendance:
	
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend and cover the Youth Parliament in the National Assembly Chamber should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: mmpindi@parlaiment.gov.za not later than Thursday, 25 June at 17:00
	
	Parliamentary sittings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public can follow the hybrid Youth Parliament live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on the Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. May subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. African National Congress