The Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP), Ms Sylvia Lucas, says the resurgence of violence against women is now a matter of national importance which requires Parliament’s urgent response and prioritisation. Speaking during the Father’s Day National Dialogue, Ms Lucas said gender-based-violence (GBV) was the most extreme expression of unequal gender relations in society, and called on joint action from all sectors to “ensure a crystallised and well-coordinated response to the GBV crisis”. “It is first and foremost a violation of human rights and global health issue that cuts across boundaries of economic, wealth, culture, religion, age and sexual orientation. Whenever gender-based violence occurs, it is a major obstacle for ensuring gender justice, which further poses a serious threat to democratic development and public health. GBV and femicide are huge barriers to achieving sustainable development, economic growth and stable communities,” said Ms Lucas. She proposed, as a solution to GBV, a paradigm shift and focus on the root cause of violence, founded on gender-based power relations and gender-based discrimination. She also called for the acceleration of the clearance of the backlogs at forensic laboratories related to gender-based violence and sexual assaults. “Parliament must make the sex offenders register public and easily accessible online, and lobby the Judicial Council to impose harsher jail sentences for perpetrators of gender-based violence,” she recommended. Ms Lucas said Parliament recognises the need for a nationwide response to GBV and femicide, where every sector and individual in our society can participate towards ending this scourge. She announced that Parliament will initiate a public engagement process to solicit the views of women regarding the enactment of legislation that will fight femicide. She said this was also a resolution of the 2019 Women’s Parliament, where women appealed to Parliament to enact legislation that will fight femicide. According to her, Parliament will also continue to exercise its oversight role over the work of the executive in order to ensure a sustained focus in response to plans and budget allocation, so as to root out GBV and femicide. The Men’s Dialogue was facilitated by the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, Mr Lechesa Tsenoli, and a veteran television actor, Mr Patrick Shai, an outspoken reformed perpetrator of gender-based violence (GBV), who is now doing advocacy work. Mr Shai shared with the forum how painful it was that men who change after committing GBV, remain guilty forever in our communities. “Change is pain, I am hurt by my past but I remain resolute to the values that I stand for, and I am not apologetic for having changed,” he said. The forum was also addressed by the Deputy Ministers of Health and Social Development, Dr Joe Phaahla and Ms Hendrietta Bogopane-Zulu, respectively, who also added their voices in calling for a joint effort to end gender-based violence. The forum also heard that the patterns and persistence of gender-based violence are interwoven into social norms and power relations, and leave deep scars on our society that result in psychosocial trauma – and adversely affect social cohesion, and also lead to the stigmatisation of survivors, and have negative developmental outcomes. “We have learnt from HIV that stigma itself is a pandemic, and we have a lot of stigmas in this country which will destroy the nation,” warned Deputy Minister Bogopane-Zulu. Deputy Minister Phaahla said: “It is up to us as parents to instil values of citizenry in our children, and to tell our boys not to glorify violence, and set high values through committed fatherhood to promote non-violence in our homes and communities. Real men protect their families, real men know that masculinity is to provide and protect, not to harm.” By Sakhile Mokoena 21 June 2020 Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo