Parliament, Wednesday, 24 June 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure is ready to conduct oversight over the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure’s coordinating function in the implementation of the government’s Infrastructure investment plan.
	
	The committee is looking forward to the implementation of this plan, which promises to address massive infrastructure underspending by all spheres of government and state-owned enterprises by driving infrastructure development in a uniformed manner across departments at a national, provincial and local level. The committee also welcomes the focus of the Minister of Public Works and the department on addressing the geospatial disparities arising from separate and unequal infrastructure development during apartheid.
	
	The committee notes that the infrastructure and construction sector will not achieve the targets for public sector infrastructure investment stated in the National Development Plan. The committee also notes that the construction industry and infrastructure development has been severely affected by the Covid-19 pandemic. It is also important to note that workers and emerging black construction small, medium and micro enterprises (SMMEs) in this sector are the most vulnerable and have suffered severe job losses.
	
	The committee is in agreement with the department that infrastructure development holds the promise of reviving the construction sector, vulnerable workers, SMMEs, the economy and the social development sector.
	
	The committee is concerned that today’s presentation did not provide details on how the department will coordinate infrastructure development. The presentation also did not provide details on how the department and the Property Trading Management Entity (PMTE) will conduct oversight over the regulations and built environment professional services.
	
	The committee wants more detail on how the department will monitor and evaluate value for money for the funds used. It also wants to know how the department will foster social facilitation through project management and how management fees will be collected from client departments. The committee also wants details on how the department and the PMTE will avoid additional debt, as the PMTE has a history of struggling to collect management and professional service fees.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE, MS NOLITHA NTOBONGWANA.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga