Parliament, Wednesday, 10 June 2020 – The Select Committee on Education and Technology, Sports, Arts and Culture today received a briefing from the Department of Science and Innovation on its responses to the submission it received from a member of the public on the Science and Technology Laws Amendment Bill.
	
	The department presented the Bill to the committee recently where it highlighted, among other things, the objectives of the Bill and its proposed amendments to the Bill. The committee heard that only one public comment was received on the Bill after the department invited members of the public to comment on the Bill, according to the constitutional imperative of public participation in law-making.
	
	Reminding the committee about some of the objectives of the Bill, the Chairperson of the committee, Mr Elleck Nchabeleng, said: “The Bill seeks, among other things, to harmonise relations and clarify the lines of accountability within all the entities that report to it, to avoid unnecessary contradictions that will inadvertently diminish their mandates.”
	
	The department presented its detailed responses to the comments of the member of the public on the Bill. It told the committee that, generally speaking, the comments were in agreement with the amendments of the department to the Bill, but seeking clarity largely on the relationship between the Chief Executive Officer and the board. The department assured the committee that it responded adequately to each and every comment of the member of the public.
	
	Although the committee was satisfied with the responses of the department to the member of public’s comments, it engaged the department on aspects of the Bill that relate to the relationship between the board and the Chief Executive Officer and emphasised the importance of the clarity of the Public Finance Management Act in the Bill.
	
	After the committee was satisfied with the presentation and all its questions were satisfactorily answered by the department, it agreed to meet again at a date it will determine to go through the Bill, clause by clause before it adopts it. Reminding the committee about the journey which the Bill has gone through, Mr Nchabeleng said: “The Bill passed all the steps it had to pass to reach the stage where it is now.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND TECHNOLOGY, SPORTS, ARTS AND CULTURE, MR ELLECK NCHABELENG.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact:
	Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 063 503 2364
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng