Parliament, Wednesday, 17 June 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Public Enterprises and Communications were briefed by Denel on progress made in the implementation of the turnaround strategy.
	
	Briefing the committees, Denel’s Chief Executive Officer, Mr Daniel du Toit, said the 2018/19 financial year was characterised by fragmented, defocused, loss-making, ineffective, weak business systems and poor governance. The second phase towards the turnaround strategy is to stabilise and reform the entity by doing away with onerous contracts, improving commercial skills, and focusing on performance improvement.
	
	Responding to the concerns expressed by the committees, the arms manufacturer said the venture of building ventilators and ambulances is not a diversion from its core functions. It is the right thing to do, looking at the current situation the country is faced with. Denel said it has made progress towards the certification of products, working with the Department of Health.
	
	The committees said the turnaround plan does not talk about small, micro and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and how it will contribute towards localisation. The committees proposed that within a year Denel needs to provide an update on the objectives the entity has set for itself.
	
	On the financial stability and whether Denel is able to pay salaries to its employees, Denel said that’s a going concern. The Chief Financial Officer, Ms Carmen le Grange, said: “We have run the numbers with the shareholder’s support and we are putting mitigating actions in place such as negotiating with our suppliers. We can be a going concern.”
	
	The arms manufacturer said it could not pay full salaries for those in top management but employees at the lower scales got their full salaries. Mr Du Toit said the company is using a sliding scale.
	
	The committees said Denel needs to look at other regions for business opportunities and not only focus on the Middle East. Denel indicated it cannot focus on one region, it has been looking at SADC, Latin America and India.
	
	The committees said they need to be taken into full confidence as to whether Denel will be able to fully implement the turnaround strategy. Board Chairperson, Ms Monhla Hlahla, said Denel can be stabilised but that will be painful. She indicated that “it will not be possible to say we will be financed easily”.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES, MR KHAYA MAGAXA – AND THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES AND COMMUNICATIONS, MR TSHITEREKE MATIBE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committees’ Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs. Democratic Alliance on the National List