Parliament, Friday, 26 June 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology, Mr Philly Mapulane, has welcomed the appointment of the new Vice-Chancellor and Principal of the University of Witwatersrand (Wits), Professor Zeblon Vilakazi. The university announced yesterday that its Council has confirmed the appointment.
	
	“The appointment of Prof Vilakazi takes place at an appropriate period in the post-school education and training sector, as we grapple with the debates around the complete transformation and re-orientation of institutions of higher learning so that they serve the majority of the people of this country, rather than the minority, as it was in the past,” said Mr Mapulane.
	
	The repositioning of the South African universities as centres of knowledge production and research with an African agenda is a progressive perspective. “We hope Prof Vilakazi will help to shape and steer forward this agenda,” Mr Mapulane stated.
	
	We also hope Prof Vilakazi will contribute meaningfully in positioning Wits University to be part of a single, centrally co-ordinated system of higher education in South Africa and not one that perpetuates the inequalities of the past colonial and apartheid past.”
	
	Mr Mapulane also thanked the outgoing Vice-Chancellor, Prof Adam Habib, for his leadership of the university. “We will remember Prof Habib for his calmness and humility during the #Feesmustfall student protests in pursuit of a generational mission to demand free, decolonised and quality higher education.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, MR PHILLY MAPULANE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Anybody over the age of 18 can participate indirectly in Parliament simply by voting in the elections. African National Congress