Parliament, Thursday, 25 June 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Communications has welcomed the work done so far by the South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) on its turnaround strategy, which was approved in September 2019.
	
	The committee was briefed on the SABC’s turnaround strategy by the Minister and Deputy Minister of Communications and Digital Technologies, as well as the SABC Board and management. The committee Chairperson, Mr Boyce Maneli, said: “The committee believes that the work done by the corporation so far is demonstrable. However, the committee still need more time to engage the SABC further on the subject matter.”
	
	Mr Maneli further expressed the committee’s full support of the turnaround strategy, saying that the committee will hold accountable the Department of Communications and Digital Technologies to play its part. He appealed to the department to ensure that the SABC gets a fair share of government spending on Covid-19 information dissemination.
	
	The committee believes that the SABC’s announcement to retrench about 600 staff members is premature, and encouraged the corporation to first consider reskilling and upskilling its workforce. The committee also held a view that SABC should embark on an open and transparent consultation process with organised labour.
	
	“This consultation process should not only be fair, but it must be seen to be fair, and the SABC must avoid creating any doubt on its bona fides,” said Mr Maneli.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE COMMUNICATIONS, MR BOYCE MANELI
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committees’ Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape