Parliament, Tuesday, 9 June 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs has today resolved that it will conduct an oversight visit to the Government Printing Works (GPW) where the majority union has made allegations of corruption and wrongdoing. The committee will interact with all stakeholders at the entity to find solutions to challenges raised.
	
	“The committee reiterates its stance against corruption and will act with urgency to deal with any wrongdoing. It is in this context that the committee will visit GPW on the 17th of June 2020 to get to the bottom of the challenges at GPW,” said Adv Bongani Bongo, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	Meanwhile, the committee remains of the view that the Department of Home Affairs will continue to fail to achieve targets because of the unreliability of the network. Information Technology is at the heart of the service that the department offers and it must function optimally to enable the department to achieve its set targets.
	
	The department today presented the 4th quarter performance and highlight that downtime continues to be the department’s major problem in delivery of services. “The perennial problem of connectivity remains a concern and requires a decision at the highest level on how to resolve it promptly. We are going to invite the Department of Communications and the State Information Technology Agency to get to the bottom of this matter,” said Adv Bongo.
	
	The committee acknowledges the impact of Covid-19 on the roll out of the e-Permit system in foreign missions. The committee urges the department to move with speed to install the software and hardware as soon as travel out of the country is allowed. The implementation of the e-Visa is central in the recovery of the tourism sector which has long been recognised as a driver for economic growth and job creation.
	
	Despite this, the committee has raised concerns about the inability to achieve its target of adjudicating 85% of critical skills visas within four weeks from the date of receipt of application until outcome. The committee remains of the view that a healthy and growing economy is dependent on its ability to attract a skilled labour force to fill critical positions. The committee urged the department to put in place mitigation plans to deal with this challenge.
	
	The intention by the department to roll out a youth-centred programme to make available the services of the department mainly to the youth is welcomed. As the country commemorates Youth Month, the department must recommit to taking its services closer to the people, especially the poor and those in rural areas.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, ADV BONGANI BONGO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal