Parliament, Wednesday, 10 June 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy was briefed by the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy on the agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) for co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy in terms of Section 231(2) of the Constitution.
	
	The committee then unanimously agreed to a request from the department that the department will revise its input, in light of new developments since the co-operation agreement was signed in 2013, and subsequently approved by Cabinet in 2018. The committee will also use the opportunity to seek legal advice with regards to the same agreement.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Sahlulele Luzipo, said that department’s input should take into consideration circumstances that may be overlapping with the co-operation agreement and the role that will be played by entities. “We do not require the department to revise the agreement, but rather develop a comprehensive and up-to-date input,” said Mr Luzipo.
	
	The main purpose of the co-operation agreement is to further expand and deepen the mutual beneficial economic, scientific and technical co-operation, which include, among others, research and development in the field of nuclear, transfer of nuclear materials and equipment, nuclear safeguards, and the use of nuclear materials and technologies such as applications in health and agriculture.
	
	Once it receives the legal advice and comprehensive input from the department, the committee will then deliberate and make recommendations to the National Assembly on whether it supports the agreement.
	
	Additionally, the committee sent a message of condolence to the family and friends of a Member of Parliament, Hon Dorah Dlamini. Mr Luzipo respectfully implored the family to be comforted in the knowledge that Hon Dlamini served the country diligently in her elected position of responsibility.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MR SAHLULELE LUZIPO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 748
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. African National Congress