Parliament, Tuesday 23 June 2020 – Minister of Finance Mr Tito Mboweni is scheduled to deliver a supplementary budget speech to the National Assembly hybrid plenary sitting starting at 15.00 tomorrow.
	
	The latest programme from Parliament reflects that Mr Mboweni is also scheduled to table the Adjustments Appropriation Bill, the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill and the Disaster Management Tax Relief Bill tomorrow.
	
	The National Council of Provinces passed the 2020 Appropriation Bill last Friday completing the process of Parliament passing the budget, which Mr Mboweni tabled in February.
	
	Ahead of Mr Mboweni’s supplementary budget speech – starting from 9.00 Auditor General of South Africa Mr Kimi Makwetu will brief members of the National Council of Provinces on the Local Government Audit Outcomes (MFMA 2018/19) Report.
	
	National Council of Provinces Virtual Sitting Details
	Date: Wednesday, 24 June
	Time: 09:00
	Venue: Virtual Video Platform
	
	National Assembly Hybrid Sitting Details
	Date: Wednesday, 24 June
	Time: 15.00
	Venue: Virtual Video Platform and National Assembly Chamber, Parliament
	
	
	PLEASE NOTE: Media wising to physically attend the National Assembly sitting should send their details (full name, name of media house and ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: mmpindi@parliament.gov.za by no later than 12.00, tomorrow Wednesday 24 June
	
	Parliamentary sittings are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICAEnquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga