Parliament, Thursday, 25 June 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Small Business Development is pleased that work is in an advanced stage to make all systems and programmes of the Small Enterprise Finance Agency (Sefa) and Small Enterprise Development Agency (Seda) work seamlessly to the benefit of small, medium and micro enterprises (SMMEs).
	
	The committee was briefed by Sefa and Seda on their fourth quarter reports for the 2019/20 financial year, and the two entities were accompanied by officials from the Department of Small Business Development.
	
	The committee Chairperson, Ms Violet Siwela, welcomed the move and said the committee still expected a full report on how Sefa and Seda will work as a unity. “We cannot agree that the majority of Sefa-funded businesses in the rural areas, especially those managed by women, youth and people living with disabilities, face a high mortality rate due to unaligned services offered by the two entities under one department,” said Ms Siwela.
	
	Ms Siwela further expressed confidence in the department’s readiness plan to respond to the Covid-19 pandemic. According to its loan book performance, Sefa disbursed R295 million worth of loans to SMMEs against the annual target of R159 million in the 2019/20 financial year. The loans contributed to the creation of 18 637 jobs, against the entity’s annual target of 18 399 jobs.
	
	Additionally, the committee has welcomed the performance of Seda, in which the entity, among other things, managed to support 139 cooperatives to secure funding against the annual target of 200 cooperatives. Most of the assisted cooperatives are in the agricultural sector. Seda donated 30 Bonsmara bulls to eight farms in the Heuningvlei area in the Northern Cape, as well as training 140 farmers on bull management. The training was valued at R150 000.
	
	Ms Siwela said more training about the work of Sefa and Seda should be provided to officials who are responsible for local economic development in municipalities in order to increase the footprint of the two entities in rural areas.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT, MS VIOLET SIWELA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 748
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape