Parliament, Tuesday, 2 June 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs will today consider a report from the Public Service Commission (PSC) on allegations of corruption against the Acting Chief Executive Officer of Government Printing Works.
	
	The report emanated from a whistle-blower report to the Chairperson of the committee, Adv Bongani Bongo. During a meeting that took place on 08 May 2020, the committee resolved to initiate and gather necessary information on the allegations. “As the committee we had engaged Parliament’s legal services division to gather more information from the whistle-blower to substantiate the allegations. Also, the Minister had instituted an investigation through the PSC. Today will be an opportunity to receive those reports and chart the way forward,” said Adv Bongo.
	
	The committee will also receive a progress update from the Department of Home Affairs on the Automated Biometric Identification System (ABIS) and Visa Facilitation Services (VFS) contracts.
	
	Details of the meeting
	Date: 2 June 2020
	Time: 15:00
	Venue: Virtual meeting
	
	Members of the media who would like to be part of the meeting to observe may forward their contact details to Mr. Mlindi Mpindi on +2781 716 7329 for inclusion in the Parliament Communications Service WhatsApp group, where login details will be shared.
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow the meeting live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408) and via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, ADVOCATE BONGANI BONGO
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. Democratic Alliance