Parliament, Sunday, 14 June 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy, Mr Sahlulele Luzipo, has noted the misleading media statement by the member of the committee, Mr Kevin Mileham, who expressed some misinformation about Mr Luzipo and the committee.
	
	Although Mr Luzipo understood Mr Mileham to be aiming at gaining some political mileage, he held a view however, that it was disingenuous to state that he has not responded to Mr Mileham’s request for urgent briefing of the committee on the eminent shortage of diesel supply in the country.
	
	The request is in a letter dated 9 June, which was only sent in the afternoon of the following day, on 10 June 2020 when the committee meeting was in progress and Mr Mileham was present in the same meeting.
	
	However, for the reasons only known to him, he said nothing about the letter, and for that, Mr Luzipo found him to be disingenuous in his approach.
	
	Mr Luzipo believes that it would have been appreciated, had Mr Mileham raised the matter with the committee in the meeting as he usually does, or brings it to his attention on the side.
	
	Mr Luzipo is confident that the committee would have considered the request, and if agreed, it would have scheduled a meeting for briefing by the department.
	
	Mr Luzipo is clueless about why Mr Mileham chose to remain silent in the meeting about his request, which he considered urgent, but rushed to issue a media statement.
	
	The letter will be tabled in a committee meeting for consideration and a way forward, which is the normal procedure. However, if agreed, scheduling of a briefing by the department will be subject to the availability of a virtual platform.
	
	Mr Luzipo is of the view that only dishonourable people with underhanded tactics behave in the manner that Mr Mileham has behaved.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MR SAHLULELE LUZIPO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 748
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo