Parliament, Thursday, 06 August 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure notes with deep concern the recent media reports alleging improper involvement in the appointment procedures of service providers by the Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure.
	
	The committee holds the position that rumour-mongering hampers the fight to clean up government and the Department of Public Works of Infrastructure, in particular. The scourge of corruption is threatening South Africa and its development programmes. It is crucial that when rumours emerge about ministers’ and other public officials’ improper conduct, all parties, particularly the accused, come forward with evidence of proof or disproof. The practice of counter-allegations in the media does not fight corruption, but rather escalates the perception of its proliferation.
	
	The committee urges all parties to cease the habit of leaking information to the media before bringing evidence to the committee, so that it can do its constitutionally-assigned oversight duty. It also advises that where such evidence points to improper conduct, proper legal procedures be taken so that such practices can be rooted out.
	
	The committee requests that where evidence exists to prove or disprove the allegations, these be tabled to its secretariat so that oversight procedures can assist the department with its on-going attempts to fight malpractice and corruption.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPRSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE, MS NOLITHA NTOBONGWANA.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng