Parliament, Tuesday 11 August 2020 – Tomorrow, the Western Cape Division of the High Court (Cape Town) is scheduled to start hearing the application by the Public Protector, Advocate Busisiwe Mkhwebane, to interdict Parliament from considering a motion calling for her removal from office.
	
	The application by the Public Protector is divided into two parts. In Part A, the Public Protector seeks an interim interdict to suspend the removal process, pending a judicial review of the decision by the Speaker to accept the motion for her removal and the lawfulness of the new rules. Part B is the actual review. The hearing tomorrow relates specifically to Part A.
	
	Speaker of the National Assembly (NA) Ms Thandi Modise is opposing the application. In her answering affidavit, of 3 March, the Speaker provides a comprehensive rebuttal of the Public Protector’s grounds for this interdict. To read the Speaker’s affidavit, please click: https://tinyurl.com/yxv6etlb and https://tinyurl.com/yyex4xm7
	
	Parliament’s removal procedure puts practical steps in place to implement section 194 of Chapter 9 of the Constitution in a fair and transparent manner.
	
	Chapter 9 deals with State Institutions Supporting Constitutional Democracy.
	
	These are the Public Protector, the Auditor-General and members of the Commission for Gender Equality; the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities; the Electoral Commission; and the South African Human Rights Commission.
	
	Section 194 provides for removal from office of these office holders.
	
	It specifies that their removal may be only: On 3 December 2019, the NA adopted Rules and a procedure on practical and fair implementation of section 194.
	Highlights of the procedure prescribed in the Rules are as follows: The section 194 procedure and Rules, which the NA adopted, is part of Parliament’s ongoing elaboration of its overall constitutional responsibilities.
	
	On 22 November 2018, for example, the NA adopted a similar procedure and Rules to implement section 89 of the Constitution: Removal of a President.
	
	Tomorrow’s court hearing will be virtual and will be broadcast on Parliament TV, Twitter, Facebook, YouTube and iono.fm.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICAEnquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of North West