Parliament, Thursday, 20 August 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs has expressed its appreciation for the well-researched information on Local Government: Municipal Systems Amendment Bill, it received from the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, and the South African Government Association (Salga).
	
	The committee was briefed yesterday by the State Law Advisor, the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs and Salga. Both the department and SALGA shared with the committee researched information on the fixed contractual and permanent employment of managers in the municipalities.
	
	The committee said the information has enlightened it and improved its deliberations on the Bill, especially on the difference between fixed contract and permanent employment of municipal mangers. Members of the committee said they now understands the pros and cons of each nature of employment.
	The committee is of the view that if the municipality appoints a person on a permanent basis, performance will be improved, hence it prefers to use the council’s discretion as proposed by Salga. The committee has already reached a common ground on the main contentious area on the Bill, which is the limitation of political rights.
	
	Highlighting the importance of institutional memory as one of the advantages of permanent employment of managers, the Chairperson of the committee, Ms Faith Muthambi, used the example of the Eastern Cape’s Senqu Local Municipality which she said has a track record of clean audit outcomes for the past 20 years under one municipal manager, due to the council’s discretion to renew and extend the fixed terms of the municipal manager and the chief financial officer.
	
	According to the history of the municipality, Ms Muthambi said the municipal manager started to work in the municipality as an intern. Using its discretion, the council afforded the intern an opportunity to grow within the municipality and later he became the municipal manager. Also, the council had three mayors in the past 20 years.
	
	The committee has exhausted the matter related to fixed versus permanent contract in the Bill, and can move to clause by clause step in the process of dealing with the Bill where it will be easy for the committee to reach a consensus.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COGTA, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng