Parliament, Tuesday, 4 August 2020 – The Chairperson of the Select Committee on Education, Technology, Sports, Arts and Culture, Mr Elleck Nchabeleng, has called on South African Rugby and Cricket South Africa to cleanse their images of the racism tag.
	
	“The stories told by black professional athletes is concerning, and could lead many to conclude that nothing has been achieved. This is the time to show leadership and not bury our heads in the sand.
	
	“The tales that have been shared over the past few days are scary, and should be addressed honestly. We can’t act as if we’ve never seen anything. Boardroom presentations on quotas and transformation targets need to be complemented by a fundamental shift of attitude among people we regard as representatives of our country.
	
	“It is so embarrassing that black athletes are all having individual stories to tell. Racism has no place in South African sports, the impression that young white athletes create exclusionary environment in teams through use of Afrikaans or social mannerisms is a concern.”
	
	Various black professional cricket and rugby legends, administrators and commentators have come out to say they encountered racism in the two codes, particularly cricket.
	
	Mr Nchabeleng said coming out to support the Black Lives Matter movement was inadequate for administrators, and that they needed to show leadership.
	
	“White athletes have no choice but to accept that black athletes are going to be part of the South African professional setup, and vice versa.”
	
	The committee noted the window for grant relief that has been opened again by the Department of Sports, Arts and Culture. It is preferable that poor and amateur athletes also benefit from the scheme.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, TECHNOLGY, SPORTS AND CULTURE, MR ELLECK NCHABELENG.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Sibongile Maputi
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape