Parliament, Thursday, 20 August 2020 – The National Assembly, at its hybrid plenary sitting today, has approved the Presidential notice on salary adjustments for the Office of the Auditor-General of South Africa for 2020/2021 financial year.
	
	The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms Thandi Modise earlier this year received and referred to the Standing Committee on the Auditor General, a draft notice from the President of the Republic, dated 26 March 2020, for consideration and making of a recommendation to the National Assembly. In terms of the Determination of Remuneration of Office-Bearers of Independent Constitutional Institutions Laws Amendment Act, 2014 (Act No. 22 of 2014), the President is required to make a determination on the salaries and allowances of members of the Independent Constitutional Institutions, and submit a notice to the National Assembly for consideration and approval before such a determination can be implemented.
	
	Also, the Public Audit Act 25 of 2004, Section 7(1), provides that the Auditor-General of South Africa is entitled to an annual salary and such allowances, or benefits as determined by the President from time to time, by notice in the Government Gazette, and submission to the National Assembly for consideration and approval.
	
	In the notice, the President says he had taken into consideration the economic challenges the country is experiencing, as well as the current fiscal constraints in making the determination on the matter that is expected to take effect on 01 April 2020. The determination submitted to the National Assembly is to the effect that:
	
	1. Salary freeze (0%) for office bearers earning R1.5 million and above;
	2. 2.8% salary adjustment for office bearers earning between R1 million and
	R1.5 million; and
	3. 4.5% salary adjustment for office bearers earning below R1 million.
	
	On 10 July 2020, the Standing Committee on the Auditor-General considered and supported the approval of the intended salary adjustments for the Office of Auditor-General of South Africa. Its report was subsequently considered and approved by the National Assembly in its hybrid plenary session today in Cape Town.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga