Members of the Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy on Tuesday morning heard that processes are underway to reconfigure and possibly merge some three entities under the Central Energy Fund (CEF) group of companies, namely PetroSA, Strategic Fuel Fund (CFF) and the iGas. The information was presented to committee members by Minister Gwede Mantashe, who was accompanied by the department’s Director-General, Adv Thabo Mokoena, and some Deputy Directors-General. Minister Mantashe said that reconfiguration of entities that have overlapping mandates and less business viability was part of a strategic effort to review the size, composition and efficiency of government. The merger and acquisition project is envisaged to be complete in the 2021/22 financial year. In his State of the Nation Address on 16 February 2018, President Cyril Ramaphosa did touch on the subject of reviewing the composition of government in order to create a strong and capable state. He said: “Growth, development and transformation depend on a strong and capable state. It is critical that the structure and size of the state is optimally suited to meet the needs of the people and ensure the most efficient allocation of public resources. We will therefore initiate a process to review the configuration, number and size of national government departments.” Minister Mantashe told committee members that the CEF Group has identified a consortium of three companies that collectively have presents in over 90 countries around the world to provide value proposition to the group, and that they have extensive global and local experience in the energy practice, as well as mergers and acquisitions. They are Kearney, Bayajula and Mazars. Mr Mantashe cautioned, however, that reconfiguration may result in retrenchments. “Retrenchments may be inevitable, but once finalised, the new entity could absorb more people,” he said. Adv Mokoena added that the planned group merger will be executed in two phases, including the foundation phase which will consist of three sub-pillars, namely strategy and merger design, merger detailing, and merger implementation. The second phase will consist of transition support. “The transition support will consist of activities that will ensure that the sustainability of the merger is not compromised. This will be more around culture, process and systems,” said Adv Mokoena. The committee members further welcomed reassurance by Minister Mantashe that government has no plans to sell any state-owned entities, but it will do everything in its power to assist them to be commercially viable. On the other hand, members thanked the Minister for restoring governance sustainability at the South African Nuclear Energy Corporation (Necsa) group of companies, in which a single governance structure for the current Necsa Group has since been approved in March 2020. Mr Mantashe said that the rationalisation and repurposing of the Necsa Group will be done in a manner that will ensure that the Group’s core mandate, as derived from the Nuclear Energy Act, is not compromised. The subsidiary companies under the Necsa Group are NTP Radioisotopes, Pelchem, Pelindaba Enterprises, Safari-1 and the Necsa Learning Academy. By Justice Molafo 18 August 2020 Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga