Parliament, Tuesday, 4 August 2020 – The Standing Committee on Finance, together with the Select Committee on Finance, will tomorrow from 15:00 to 18:00 hold a joint virtual meeting to be briefed by the National Treasury on the procurement of personal protective equipment (PPE) for Covid-19.
	
	The committees also expect to be briefed on the mechanisms National Treasury has put in place to ensure that a single procurement tender worth millions is divided into multiple small tenders in order to benefit as many small, micro and medium enterprises (SMMEs) as possible.
	
	The committees decided on 28 July 2020 to invite the National Treasury to this meeting in light of the wide-ranging allegations of corruption in the public domain involving provincial departments of health and some municipalities.
	
	Co-Chairperson Mr Joe Maswanganyi reiterated that it is not in the interests of the two committees to dictate terms on how government should conduct procurement for the Covid-19 pandemic. Their concern arises from complaints of exclusion from many SMMEs.
	
	After the National Treasury’s presentation, the committees will determine if there is a need for a joint meeting with the Portfolio Committee on Health, provincial health committees and their respective departments of health.
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES 
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape