Parliament, Monday 17 August 2020 – The National Assembly will open its third term programme, tomorrow, by hosting a hybrid plenary to have debates on two socio-political issues.
	
	The first debate is part of Parliament’s annual events calendar which highlights women’s issues in the national sphere and marks National Women’s Day. This year’s debate will be held under the theme: “Generation Equality – Realising women’s rights for an equal future.”
	
	The second debate, sponsored by the Economic Freedom Fighters’ Chief Whip Mr Floyd Shivambu, is scheduled as an urgent matter of national public importance, and is titled: “Solidarity with #BlackLivesMatter – Reinforcing the commitment of all South Africans to confront and defeat individual and institutional racism in our society and everywhere else it exists”.
	
	DETAILS OF THE PLENARY
	
	Date: Tuesday, 18 August 2020
	Venue: National Assembly Chamber, Parliament and Virtual Platform
	Times: 14:00
	
	Parliamentary sittings are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape