Parliament, Tuesday 25 August 2020 – The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will tomorrow engage the Free State leadership on the Women’s Charter Review while the National Assembly (NA) will ask questions for oral reply to the Economic Cluster Ministers. Both events start at 15h00.
	
	The NCOP will report back to the Free State provincial leadership on feedback received from the districts visited in the province where High-Level Women’s Charter Review sessions were held last month.
	
	The 1994 Women’s Charter Review sessions are aimed at taking stock of the progress made in implementing the articles of the 1994 Women’s Charter for Effective Equality and assess its impact since the advent of freedom and democracy.
	
	Details of the NCOP virtual engagement:
	
	Date: Wednesday, 26 August 2020
	Time: 15.00
	Venue: Virtual platform
	
	Meanwhile, the NA will hold a Hybrid Plenary Sitting where Members of Parliament will ask oral questions to the Ministers from the Economic Cluster. The Cluster comprises of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development, Communications, Employment and Labour, Environmental Affairs, Forestry and Fisheries, Finance, as well as Mineral Resources and Energy.
	
	Among questions to be answered by the Ministers of Finance as well as Employment and Labour scheduled for Wednesday's plenary sitting are:
	
	Whether there were transactional advisors who were involved in securing the loans from the International Monetary Fund; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, who were the advisors and what amount was each advisor paid?
	
	What are the departmental plans to address the rising unemployment rate, especially in light of the devastating effects that the Government’s extended lockdown to curb the spread of Covid-19 has had on the Republic’s already frail economy?
	
	For the full list of questions, please click here.}
	
	Details of the Hybrid Sitting are as follows:
	
	Date: Wednesday,26 August 2020
	Time: 15.00
	Venue: National Assembly and Virtual platform
	
	Members of the media who would like to observe the Sitting may forward their contact details to Mr Mlindi Mpindi on mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliament Communications Service WhatsApp group, where login details will be shared. Journalists are urged to forward the request using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow the virtual engagement live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. African National Congress