Parliament, Tuesday 18 August 2020 – Tomorrow, on Wednesday 19 August at 15.00, the National Assembly (NA) will hold an oral questions session with the six Peace and Security Cluster Ministers at its hybrid plenary sitting.
	
	The cluster comprises Ministers responsible for Defence and Military Veterans, Home Affairs, International Relations and Co-operation, Justice and Correctional Services, Police, State Security.
	
	The hybrid sitting will entail a limited number of NA members being physically present in the NA Chamber (in line with the social distancing guidelines) and other members joining the sitting through a virtual platform.
	
	Parliament uses a range of instruments to scrutinise and oversee executive action. Section 92(2) of the Constitution also stipulates that Cabinet Members are accountable collectively and individually to Parliament for the exercise of their powers and performance of their functions.
	
	For the full list of questions, please click: https://www.parliament.gov.za/storage/app/media/Docs/quest_pap/8c0e589a-5435-4eac-98f1-1b6d4ce20358.pdf
	
	Details of the hybrid sitting are as follows:
	Date: Wednesday 19 August 2020
	Time: 15.00
	Venue: National Assembly Chamber at Parliament and virtual platform
	
	Members of the media who wish to observe the sitting should forward their contact details to Mr Mlindi Mpindi on mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliament Communications Service WhatsApp group, where login details will be shared. Journalists must forward their requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow the proceedings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via the live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel, Facebook and Twitter pages. Please see links below.
	
	You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga