Parliament, Tuesday, 4 August 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans, Mr Cyril Xaba, welcomes the appointment of the new Secretary for Defence, Ms Gladys Sonto Kudjoe.
	
	Ms Kudjoe was the first female Director-General of the State Security Agency (SSA) in 2013, she was an ambassador to Egypt from 2006 to 2010 and held several positions in the Department of International Relations and Cooperation.
	
	Mr Xaba said Ms Kudjoe’s appointment signifies the continued empowerment of women in the defence sector. He said: “As the country commemorates women’s month, we welcome the appointment of Ms Kudjoe in this highly crucial position and we believe that her experience, strength and vast knowledge of the defence industry will contribute to bringing the much-needed stability to the department.”
	
	Furthermore, Mr Xaba said: “We realise the enormous task ahead and the myriad of challenges facing the department and thus we wish her well in her new role.”
	
	Mr Xaba has, on behalf of the committee, expressed good wishes to the outgoing Secretary for Defence, Dr Gulube who first joined the South African National Defence Force as a medical doctor in the Military Health Services. Dr Gulube was a key role-player in the drafting of the 2015 Defence Review.
	
	Mr Xaba said Dr Gulube’s contribution to the local defence industry strategy and his focus on the Defence Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Sector Code are some of the key attributes which he will be remembered for. “On behalf of the committee, I wish to thank Dr Gulube for his service to the country and wish him well in his much deserved retirement,” added Mr Xaba.
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS, MR CYRIL XABA. 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape