Parliament, Tuesday, 18 August 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Sport, Arts and Culture today met with the South African Football Association (Safa) to discuss finances and governance matters of the national football administration body.
	
	Committee members commended the federation for its efforts to develop football in the country, especially in rural areas. However, Safa was found wanting when it comes to development and promotion of the sport in schools, and members called on the association to ensure this was attended to.
	
	The committee also questioned the soccer body on the pay discrepancies between male (Bafana) and female (Banyana) players for the national soccer teams.
	
	Safa acknowledged this inequality and told the committee that work was being done to ensure equality on the remuneration of soccer players for both women and male teams.
	
	Acting CEO, Adv Tebogo Motlanthe, said contributing to the discrepancy was the fact that Safa relies on sponsors and a bulk of the sponsorship are for Bafana, with Banyana having only one sponsor.
	
	He told the committee that Safa was working on getting more sponsors for Banyana Banyana in order to close the pay gap between male and female soccer players.
	
	Safa disputed reports that it was bankrupt, with CFO Gronie Hluyo boasting to the committee that the organisation recorded a surplus of R60 million.
	
	The football association also disputed reports that it had written off R450 million in relation to the Siyaya TV deal for broadcast rights. The CFO said the signed broadcast agreement could not be implemented due to Siyaya failing to acquire a licence for the free to air channel, and the contract had to be cancelled.
	
	Safa later signed the broadcast rights deal with the SABC, which currently broadcasts all games of the national football teams.
	
	The committee also heard that Safa received an amount of US$500 000 (R8.6 million) from international football governing body, FIFA, for Covid-19 relief and that more relief funding was expected from the Confederation of African Football (CAF).
	
	The committee has instructed Safa to submit a progress report on the planned retrenchments in the organisation, as well as the process of appointing a permanent CEO.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SPORT, ARTS AND CULTURE, MS BEAUTY DLULANE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sakhile Mokoena
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 705 2130
	Email: smokoena@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Free State