Parliament, Monday, 24 August 2020 – The National Assembly (NA) will tomorrow, Tuesday, 24 August hold a hybrid plenary sitting to debate an urgent matter of national importance themed: “Phased-in approach to the reopening of schools by the Department of Education.” Mr Siphosethu Ngcobo of the Inkatha Freedom Party is sponsoring this debate.
	
	DETAILS OF THE NA HYBRID PLENARY SITTING:
	Date: Tuesday, 25 August 2020
	Time: 14.00
	Venue: National Assembly Chamber, Parliament
	
	Meanwhile, the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will be briefed virtually by Minister Thoko Didiza on the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development’s interventions to mitigate the impact of the Covid-19 Pandemic.
	
	DETAILS OF THE NCOP VIRTUAL MINISTERIAL BRIEFING:
	Date: Tuesday, 25 August 2020
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: Virtual Platform
	
	Parliamentary sittings are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 693 MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. Economic Freedom Fighters