Parliament, Tuesday, 18 August 2020 – A joint meeting of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure and the Select Committee on Transport, Public Service and Administration, Public Works and Infrastructure met today to receive a briefing from the Minister and the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure on the corruption allegations and investigation reports on the precautionary suspension of the Director-General in relation to procurement of services to state funerals and the investigation of the Beitbridge border-fencing project, and actions against officials that were involved in alleged malpractice and corruption.
	
	The committees are deeply concerned about the internal professional capacity in the department to procure services for state funerals and construction projects in compliance with section 217 of the Constitution, the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), National Treasury practice notes, and the department’s own procurement regulations. This concern stretches to the capacity to account and report timeously within the supply chain management system, and to the senior management team and the Minister.
	
	The committees emphasise that the department should have systems in place that prevent malpractice and corruption. When it procures services, the committees said, the department cannot lay the blame on the private service providers alone. Furthermore, they said it must take responsibility for the environment allowed by its own weaknesses.
	
	With regard to the procurement of service providers for state funerals, the committees have suggested that a cap be placed on expenditure. They signaled that it is crucial to procure services as per the legal framework, so that the same companies are not appointed for all the services as it happened in the case of state funerals.
	
	The committees appreciate that the investigation into the Beitbridge Border Post project identified incidences where officials, the principal agent and the contractor were allegedly involved in corrupt activities. Also, the committees noted that prices were inflated and it is crucial that steps against these officials and private service providers should not end with disciplinary measures, but if necessary, criminal cases must be opened against all those that were involved.
	
	According to the committees, the reports presented in today’s meeting suggested that the department has little internal professional capacity to assess, monitor, and report timeously on non-compliance with the PFMA, National Treasury, and the department’s procurement rules. The committees said this suggested that the internal situation of this department is a perfect environment for malpractice and corruption.
	
	It is further worrying that the department is quite focused on disciplinary steps only after allegations of malpractice and corruption are made. The department must focus more on monitoring and reporting systems that prevent these acts before they can take place; that require a stronger focus on strengthening compliance in financial management, supply chain management, and project management so that there is no possibility of malpractice in any of the projects that the department is undertaking.
	
	The committees believe that the department has been highlighted in media as corrupt and weak for far too long. They said the Minister and administrative leadership should drastically rearrange the supply chain management and annual reporting system, so that the department does its work in strict compliance with the Constitution and the PFMA, as this is the only way in which it will regain the trust of client departments and the public. All parties involved must take responsibility so that public trust can be regained.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPRSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE, MS NOLITHA NTOBONGWANA – AND THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION, PUBLIC WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE, MR KENNETH MMOIEMANG.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo