Parliament, Wednesday 26 August 2020 – President Cyril Ramaphosa will appear before the National Assembly (NA) in a hybrid plenary tomorrow to answer Questions for Oral Reply.
	
	Holding regular question and answer sessions is one way in which Parliament, as provided by section 92(2) of the Constitution, holds the President and the Executive to account. The President’s Questions for Oral Reply are scheduled at least once a quarter during session time within Parliament’s annual programme.
	
	Up to six questions about matters of national or international importance may be asked during the three-hour session. The six questions scheduled for tomorrow’s sitting cover a range of matters, including: For the full list of questions, please click here DETAILS OF THE HYBRID PLENARY SITTING ARE AS FOLLOWS: Date: Thursday, 27 August 2020
	Time: 14:00
	Venue: National Assembly Chamber, Parliament and virtual platform Also scheduled for tomorrow, the National Assembly Programming Committee (NAPC) will convene to plan its business. The NAPC will, amongst others, consider the draft programme of the National Assembly, committee reports, and Bills before the House. DETAILS OF THE NA VIRTUAL PROGRAMMING COMMITTEE MEETING: Date: Thursday, 27 August 2020
	Time: 08:30
	Venue: Virtual Platform Important to note: Members of the media who wish to physically attend the National Assembly Hybrid Sitting should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: Mmpindi@parlaiment.gov.za no later than TOMORROW, Thursday, 26 August at 9am. Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliamentary precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival. Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng