Parliament, Tuesday, 18 August 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development, today held the first of its’ public hearings on the Upgrading of Land Tenure Rights Amendment Bill [B6 – 2020].
	
	The Bill intends to amend the Upgrading of Land Tenure Rights Act, 1991, so as to provide for the application for the conversion of land tenure rights into ownership, among other things. The committee heard differing views from individuals, women and aid organisations, organised labour and activist groups with regard to the ownership of land and the right to tenure reform and tenure security.
	
	The committee heard that African women were excluded from the right to ownership of homes and land due to the Customary Marriages Act which only recognised a man as the head of the household and the rightful owner of land and property. This was tested in the Rahube vs Rahube matter in court where the court found in favour of the applicant, Ms Rahube, to have the right of tenure to her grandmother’s house. The committee further heard that unmarried women with children also deserved the right to secure land and a home for their families. In tribal areas the Ingonyama Trust called for land under the stewardship of the king in KwaZulu-Natal to remain the same whilst organisations representing rural communities spoke out for the individual ownership of land and title deeds for rural communities.
	
	The Chairperson of the Committee, Nkosi Zwelivelile Mandela, informed the meeting that over 480 submissions were received and that the committee has written to Parliament for an extension of the public hearings to a further 2 ½ days next week to allow for more participants to present verbally to the committee.
	
	Submissions can still be submitted to the Committee Secretary via WhatsApp on 083 709 8492.
	
	The public hearings will continue tomorrow Wednesday – 19 August 2020 on the virtual platform.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, LAND REFORM AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT, NKOSI ZWELIVELILE MANDELA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng