Parliament, Wednesday 2 September 2020 – The National Assembly (NA) and National Council of Provinces (NCOP) are both scheduled to hold plenary sittings tomorrow.
	
	The NCOP sitting, on a virtual platform, is scheduled to hold an oral question and answer session with Deputy President David Mabuza and to consider the Judicial Matters Amendment Bill.
	
	The six questions, which Deputy President Mabuza is scheduled to answer, cover issues related to Eskom; COVID-19; efforts to fast-track land reform; investigation of senior executives; meetings convened on land reform, support for rural and township economies, rapid response service delivery interventions, anti-poverty initiatives and the SA National AIDS Council; and South Africa’s Infrastructure Investment Plan.
	
	To read the questions in full, please click: https://www.parliament.gov.za/storage/app/media/Docs/quest_pap/8e23dd42-94a3-46fd-9981-af4d7df711f3.pdf
	
	The Judicial Matters Amendment Bill, also for consideration at tomorrow’s NCOP sitting, aims to implement Constitutional Court rulings concerning the Divorce Act of 1979 and the National Prosecuting Authority Act of 1998.
	
	DETAILS OF THE NCOP VIRTUAL SITTING:
	Date: Thursday, 3 September 2020
	Time: 14:00
	Venue: Virtual platform
	
	The NA plenary, meanwhile, is scheduled to start with a statement from Minister of Sport, Arts and Culture Mr Nathi Mthethwa on transformation of the heritage landscape in South Africa.
	
	Consideration of committee reports is scheduled to follow this statement. The reports scheduled include those on the Road Accident Benefit Scheme Bill and on filling vacancies on the National Youth Development Agency Board.
	
	DETAILS OF THE NA PLENARY SITTING:
	Date: Thursday, 3 September 2020
	Time: 14.00
	Venue: National Assembly Chamber, Parliament and virtual platform
	
	Parliamentary sittings are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. African National Congress on the National List