Parliament, Tuesday, 1 September 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs is disappointed that it had to postpone an important scheduled meeting, due to the late submission of presentations from the City of Cape Town and the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC).
	
	The meeting was scheduled to address the issue of migrants during the Covid-19 lockdown, including the removal and integration of protesting refugees at Green Market Square in Cape Town. The committee was set to receive reports on the matter from the Department of Home Affairs, the City of Cape Town, SAHRC and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
	
	The committee appreciates the submission of the UNHCR’s report, but is perturbed by the lateness of the reports from the department and the SAHRC. The City of Cape Town did not submit a report. “The respect the UNHCR showed for the committee epitomises the spirit and standard within which we hoped all stakeholders would operate,” said Mr Mosa Chabane, the Acting-Chairperson of the committee.
	
	“The committee was unanimous in its condemnation of the two organisations because they consider this an important matter that should be treated with urgency. Furthermore, the standing rule in Parliament is that presentations must be sent to Members of Parliament timeously to give them enough time to read them and familiarise themselves with the issues, something they were unable to do due to late and non-submission of these presentations,” Mr Mosa Chabane emphasised.
	
	It is also concerning that the City of Cape Town appears to want to absolve themselves from the matter, when the committee was unequivocal that a collaborative effort was necessary to deal with the issues of the refugees at the Green Market Square. “We are cognisant that all spheres of government have specific roles and responsibilities. However, we were clear that the relevant stakeholders must work together to resolve the matter. It is in this context that the committee expected a briefing from the City of Cape Town, but the City’s attitude undermines intergovernmental relations and the standing of the portfolio committee,” Mr Chabane said.
	
	The committee has as a result resolved to defer the matter to mid-October to get a comprehensive report individually and jointly from all relevant stakeholders on the matter.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING-CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, MR MOSA CHABANE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape