Parliament, Tuesday, 1 September 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology has postponed its enquiry into the appointment of Prof Peter Mbati to the position of Vice-Chancellor of Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University and related matters. This is to allow legal processes to unfold, following threats to interdict the enquiry.
	
	Part B of the enquiry, which was scheduled to start this week, sought clarity on the process followed by the Venda University Council in dealing with allegations of sexual harassment against Prof Mbati, allegations of mismanagement of infrastructure projects during his tenure, as well as the process followed in his appointment as VC of Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University.
	
	The committee received correspondence from lawyers representing Prof Mbati and the University of Venda threatening to go to court to interdict the enquiry. The committee decided to suspend its proceedings and allow legal processes to unfold.
	
	Committee Chairperson Mr Philly Mapulane is clear that the committee’s process is not intended to determine the guilt or otherwise of any individuals or to review any matters that have been decided by the courts.
	
	Parliament has a duty to exercise oversight over public institutions in line with its constitutional mandate. This includes holding the university and the council accountable for their actions.
	
	“We do not intend to review matters that were decided in court. We want to ensure that policies were implemented properly. We are interested in how the resources were managed and whether there is any merit to the allegations that public funds meant for infrastructure projects were misappropriated during the tenure of Prof Mbati,” said Mr Mapulane.
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO HIGHER EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, MR PHILLY MAPULANE. 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sakhile Mokoena
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 705 2130
	Email:smokoena@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress