Parliament, Wednesday 16 September 2020 – The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will tomorrow, Thursday, 17 September, convene a virtual Programming Committee meeting to plan its business for the 4th term starting on 5 October.
	
	Amongst others, the Programming Committee will consider the draft 4th term programme, committee reports, and Bills before the House.
	
	DETAILS OF THE NCOP VIRTUAL PROGRAMMING COMMITTEE MEETING:
	Date: Thursday, 17 September 2020
	Time: 08:30
	Venue: Virtual Platform
	
	Meanwhile, the NCOP will also hold a plenary tomorrow to, amongst others, consider two Bills, the Disaster Management Tax Relief Bill [B 11 – 2020] and the Disaster Management Tax Administration Bill [B 12 – 2020]. The two Bills, commonly referred to as the Covid-19 Tax Bill and the Covid-19 Tax Administration Bill, were introduced by the Minister of Finance Tito Mboweni together with the special adjustment budget on 24 June 2020. During the plenary the House will also hold a Debate on Heritage Day titled: “Reviving communities and improving their quality of life through heritage sustainability.”
	
	Parliamentary meetings and plenaries are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape