Parliament, Tuesday, 22 September 2020 –The Select Committee on Petitions and Executive Undertakings will tomorrow consider the Lesawell petition, which seeks the intervention of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) in relation to the service delivery challenges facing the Masilonyana Local Municipality.
	
	The committee will also give consideration to the Abathembu Petition Report. This petition sought the intervention of the NCOP in relation to the alleged persecution and ostracisation of Abathembu nation.
	
	Details of the meeting are as follows:
	Date: Wednesday, 23 September 2020
	Time: 12:00 
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON PETITIONS AND EXECUTIVE UNDERTAKINGS, MS ZUKISWA NCITHA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 063 503 2364
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. Economic Freedom Fighters