Parliament, Friday, 4 September 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Health, Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, congratulates Dr Precious Matsoso on her appointment as a panellist in the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and response.
	
	Dr Matsoso is among the 11 panellists who were announced in Geneva by the panel’s Co-Chairs to serve on the panel. In announcing the 11 panellists yesterday, the Co-Chairs said: “Today, we are pleased to present eleven excellent panellists representing a wealth of experience from health and broader societal perspectives.”
	
	The Independent Panel which will meet approximately every six weeks from September, will hold its first meeting on 17 September 2020. Following that, it is expected to seek evidence and views from a broad range of stakeholders including from World Health Organization (WHO) Member States, health experts, economists, specialists on the social impacts of the pandemic, from civil society, the private sector, and from the general public.
	
	The Panel’s recommendations will aim to support effective management of the pandemic and strengthen how the world can prepare for and respond to future pandemics.
	
	Describing Dr Matsoso, Dr Dhlomo said: “Dr Matsoso who is the former Director-General of the Department of Health and former Chair of the Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee for the WHO Emergencies Programme, carried her management and leadership responsibility with diligence, and she excelled in international health system.”
	
	Furthermore, Dr Dhlomo said, as he worked with Dr Matsoso in various institutions before he became the Chairperson of the committee, he is confident that she will discharge her duty diligently and wished him all the best in her new responsibility.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, DR SIBONGISENI DHLOMO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 503 1840
	E-mail:mlukani@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal