Parliament, Friday, 11 September 2020 – The joint meeting of the Standing and Select Committees on Finance and Appropriations responsible for appointing the Director of the Parliamentary Budget Office (PBO) has accepted the shortlisted candidates recommended by the sub-committee.
	
	The committees are satisfied that the process identified and shortlisted the top nine candidates for the position. Of the 37 applications completed, 13 candidates met the minimum requirements of a Master’s Degree in either finance, economics, public finance or a related field (PhD is preferable), and the minimum relevant experience of 10 years.
	
	The following nine candidates have been shortlisted for the position: Mr Dzingai Francis Chapfuwa, Dr Dumisani Joseph Jantjies, Dr Lungelwa Kaywood, Mr Bongani Khumalo, Mr Jacobus Willem Mostert, Prof Seeraj Mohamed, Ms Nelia Orlandi, Prof Daniel Plaatjies and Mr Ian Charles Stuart.
	
	The committees note that 17 applicants were disqualified by Parliament’s online recruitment portal, which makes provision for preliminary disqualification based on experience and qualifications. The Chairperson of the sub-committee Mr Sfiso Buthelezi expressed the sub-committee’s disappointment with the small number of female candidates who applied and qualified for the position. This, he said, could be indicative of a larger problem with government posts, which appear not to attract female candidates.
	
	The committees recognise that the process of shortlisting nine candidates is a deviation from the usual five candidates and that interviewing nine candidates in one day can be laborious. The committees nevertheless appreciate the fact that the sub-committee has provided an opportunity for so many of the qualifying candidates to be interviewed.
	
	The committees have given their approval for the sub-committee to proceed with the interviews, scheduled for Tuesday, 22 September 2020.
	
	The committees also paid tribute to the renowned human rights lawyer, Advocate George Bizos; author and activist Mr Achmat Dangor; and the late anti-apartheid activist, Ms Nyameka Goniwe, who all passed away recently. The Chairperson of the joint committees Mr Jospeh Maswanganyi sends his condolences to the families and friends of these fallen heroes. He also paid tribute to those not mentioned who have passed during this time.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE JOINT MEETING OF THE STANDING AND SELECT COMMITTEES ON FINANCE AND APPROPRIATIONS, MR JOSEPH MASWANGANYI.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the committees’ Media Officer:
	Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 063 503 2364
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng