Parliament, Sunday 6 September 2020 – Local Government Week, provincial sessions to assess progress with implementing the 1994 Women’s Charter for Effective Equality and three committee meetings are among issues coming up this week.
	
	National Assembly (NA) members of Parliament are also embarking on a constituency period from tomorrow, until 5 October.
	
	Local Government Week is a flagship programme of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP), first held in 2012. This week’s interactive programme, starting on Tuesday, is themed: “Ensuring Capable and Financially Sound Municipalities”. To read the full programme, please click https://tinyurl.com/yyl64tkv.
	
	Tuesday’s opening session will deal with the role of the national sphere of government in assisting local government to carry out its constitutional obligation. This is scheduled to feature, among others: Wednesday’s session, focusing on provincial government, is scheduled to feature Members of the Executive Committees of the nine provinces. They are expected to elaborate on plans to improve service delivery, financial management and developing capacity – especially in municipalities under Section 139 interventions, with repetitive disclaimed audit opinions. Thursday will reflect on the application, challenges and successes of section 139 of the Constitution as well as the professionalization of the local sphere of government. This session will feature panel discussions which will include independent commentators and Mayors of Municipalities. On Friday, the NCOP’s plenary sitting is scheduled to debate the Local Government Week programme. Also on Friday, is the continuation of the Women’s Charter Review. The forthcoming review sessions – with the Mopani and Sekhukhune Districts of Limpopo – follow sessions last week with the Capricorn, Vhembe and Waterberg Districts. NCOP Deputy Chairperson Ms Sylvia Lucas and Deputy NA Speaker Mr Lechesa Tsenoli are leading the sessions, which have already taken place in the Free State, Northern Cape and Western Cape. The three committee meetings scheduled for this week are:  WEDNESDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER Select Committee on Finance: Consideration of public submissions on Disaster Management Tax Relief Bill and Disaster Management Tax Administration Bill  THURSDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER Select Committee on Finance: Consideration and adoption of committee reports on Disaster Management Tax Relief Bill and Disaster Management Tax Administration Bill  FRIDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER Sub-Committee on Filling of Vacancies on Central Drug Authority Board (Portfolio Committee on Social Development and Select Committee on Health and Social Services): Shortlisting of candidates  ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICAEnquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed. African National Congress