Parliament, Tuesday 29 September 2020 – National Council of Provinces Chairperson Mr Amos Masondo will, tomorrow, participate in a Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) webinar on democracy and human rights during Covid-19 and gender-based violence pandemics.
	
	The webinar, a delayed CPA Africa Day celebration event, will be hosted by the Eastern Cape Provincial Legislature under the theme: “Tackling the concept of People’s Democracy and Human Rights in the context of Covid-19 and the Gender-Based Violence pandemics.”
	
	The purpose of the webinar is to identify new initiatives that will ensure lasting protection of the constitutional democracy and civil engagements that are threatened by Covid-19. Presenters will look at how to harness digital innovations in public participation and steps to be taken to improve accountability mechanisms for oversight and law-making processes.
	
	The webinar also seeks to invest in multi-lateral cooperation to safeguard democratic norms and practices in light of Covid-19 challenges.
	
	DETAILS OF THE WEBINAR ARE AS FOLLOWS:
	
	Date: Wednesday, 30 September 2020
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: Virtual platform
	
	Members of the media who would like to observe the webinar may forward their contact details to Mr Mlindi Mpindi on mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliament Communication Services WhatsApp group, where login details will be shared. Journalists are urged to forward the request using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow the virtual engagement live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 083 370 6930 A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal