Parliament, Tuesday, 01 September 2020 – The Standing Committee on Appropriations will tomorrow receive a briefing from Eskom on financial issues and progress made on the committee’s recommendations emanating from its oversight visit to Eskom in October 2019. The committee will also be briefed by National Treasury on Eskom’s compliance with the conditions attached to the 2019 Special Appropriation Bill.
	
	Details of the meeting are as follows:
	Date: Wednesday, 02 September 2020
	Time: 09:00
	
	Meanwhile, the Select Committee on Petitions and Executive Undertakings is scheduled to receive a progress report on, amongst other things, the executive undertakings made by the Deputy Minister of Employment and Labour during the National Council of Provinces’ question and answer session on 28 July 2020. One of these undertakings includes the provision of R104 million to Productivity SA to support some 6 000 SMEs to improve productivity to preserve and create jobs.
	
	Details of the meeting are as follows:
	Date: Wednesday, 02 September 2020
	Time: 12:00
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the committees’ Media Officer:
	Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 063 503 2364
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng