Parliament, Monday, 6 January 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Transport, Mr Mosebenzi Zwane, has said appropriate measures need to be taken in order to protect rail infrastructure and all assets belonging to the Passenger Rail Agency of SA (Prasa).
	
	He said the amount of money the government is losing on a daily basis due to vandalism of the rail infrastructure by vandals who have made it a habit to burn trains, is alarming and concerning.
	
	On the weekend, 24 trains were reportedly burnt in the Free State. Although there seems to be no link that has been established so far, however the Free State train burning incident followed numerous train burnings in and around Cape Town.
	
	“Nothing should be left to chance in guarding against this kind of sabotage. The committee will forever condemn the illegal acts of burning government infrastructure, perpetuated for no apparent reasons other than destructive behavior, silliness, and short-sightedness,” Mr Zwane said.
	
	He said the committee supports all the efforts by the Department of Transport and the Ministry to bring to the perpetrators to book.
	
	“While the investigations are continuing, proper security plans should be crafted and implemented expeditiously countrywide, and such plans are crucial because rail is central to a functioning public transport that links poor South Africans to economic opportunities,” added Mr Zwane.
	
	He said the failure to protect government infrastructure will result in sporadic burnings in other provinces. Mr Zwane said: “No stone should be left unturned in bringing the perpetrators of the latest burning to book.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, MR MOSEBENZI ZWANE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party.Read more