Parliament, Monday, 06 January 2020 - The Presiding Officers of Parliament, led by the Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms Thandi Modise and the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr Amos Masondo mourns the passing of Richard Maponya this morning.
	
	Mr Maponya was a visionary and an inspirational South African who, against all odds, fiercely resisted oppression to build a successful business. He was courageous in the face of adversity, a gallant activist and an outstanding community builder whose reach and indelible legacy will continue to be felt within various communities around Soweto and South Africa.
	
	A pathfinder who started from humble beginnings, Mr Maponya built his wealth from scratch through hard work and dedication, ultimately attaining a business empire that includes property development. He defied a cruel oppressive apartheid system that legalised the destruction of African people. At the height of oppression, he established the National African Federated Chamber of Commerce (Nafcoc) aimed at safeguarding the interests of the African business.
	
	For his excellent contribution to entrepreneurship, despite oppressive apartheid conditions, and for serving as an inspiration to disadvantaged South Africans striving for business success, he was awarded the Order of Baobab in Silver in 2007.
	
	“Ntate Maponya represented what vuku’zenzele (get up and do it for yourself) means. He remains a beacon of hope and inspiration for Black entrepreneurship, to both young and old, and every South African who aspires to venture in the world of business."
	
	“He has made a remarkable contribution to the building of our economy, upliftment of particularly the previously disadvantaged and to the construction of our Constitutional democracy. He was a true epitome of courage, conviction, compassion, tenacity and moral integrity," said the Presiding Officers.
	
	South Africa is poorer without such a remarkable patriot. The Presiding Officers of Parliament send their heartfelt condolences to the family.
	
	May his soul rest in peace.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA 
	
	Enquiries 
	Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more