Parliament, Sunday, 20 December 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation, Ms Machwene Semenya, has welcomed the arrests in connection with the construction of a shack settlement in Talana, in Tzaneen in the Limpopo province.
	
	“The arrests are testament to the intensification of the fight against malfeasance and corruption within the state. We applaud law enforcement agencies for their swift action that led to the arrest of the suspects and we are hopeful that the arrest will lead to effective prosecution,” said Ms Semenya.
	
	The arrests are related to the 40 shacks settlement project which is valued at R2.4 million in the Greater Tzaneen Local Municipality which is part of the multimillion-rand temporary housing scheme, and which is part of the Covid-19 emergency procurement.
	
	Ms Semenya emphasised that the R64,000 paid for each unit was unjustifiable and undermines the values of sensible use of tax-payers’ money. Furthermore, Ms Semenya said the quality and standard of the shacks was an affront and inconsistent to the principles of quality human settlements promised to the people of South Africa.
	
	Meanwhile, Ms Semenya also welcomed the court appearance of the former Chief Executive of Lepelle Northern Water Board, Mr Phineas Legodi, the Chairperson of the bid evaluation committee, Gwako Moseamedi and businessman Matome Sefalafala in connection with allegations of fraud in a R45 million tender.
	
	Ms Semenya emphasised that effective prosecution is the only tool that can be used to give impetus in the fight against corruption that diverts money that is earmarked for projects that are intended to improve the lives of the people.
	
	The committee has maintained its stance in the fight against fraud and corruption within the sector especially in the context of the amount of money invested in infrastructure development in the sector. Also the committee wants to ensure that the expected economic spin-offs from infrastructure development are not curtailed by corruption.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HUMAN SETTLEMENTS, WATER AND SANITATION, MS MACHWENE SEMENYA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo