Parliament, Wednesday 2 December 2020 – The National Assembly will tomorrow debate a motion of no confidence in President Cyril Ramaphosa - tabled by the African Transformation Movement.
	
	The motion is scheduled in terms of Section 102 of the Constitution. In terms of the Rules of the Assembly, the Speaker, after proper consultation and once satisfied that the proposed motion is compliant, must schedule it for debate and voting within a reasonable period of time given the program of the House.
	
	The motion will be debated and voted on in a hybrid sitting of the House through an open ballot.
	
	THE DETAILS OF THE DEBATE ARE AS FOLLOWS:
	
	Date: Tomorrow, Thursday, 3 December 2020
	Time: 14:00
	Venue: Hybrid (Online Platform and National Assembly Chamber, Parliament)
	
	Meanwhile, the National Council of Provinces will during its virtual plenary tomorrow at 2pm receive a briefing from the Minister of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs and the Inter-Ministerial Task Team (IMTT) on the North West Intervention in terms of section 100 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 to table and present a progress report on the work of the IMTT.
	
	Important to note:
	
	Members of the media who wish to physically be in the NA Chamber to attend the plenary should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: Mmpindi@parlaiment.gov.za no later than TOMORROW, THURSDAY, 3 December 2020 at 10am.
	
	Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliamentary precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. African National Congress