Parliament, Tuesday, 8 December 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Environment, Forestry and Fisheries today was briefed by various stakeholders on the fire that broke out at the Engen refinery in Durban on 4 December 2020.
	
	The committee received presentations from Engen; the Department of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries (DEFF); the KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Department of Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs (EDTEA); eThekwini Metropolitan Municipality and non-governmental organisations representing the affected communities.
	
	The committee notes the establishment of a joint operations committee made up of DEFF; EDTEA; eThekwini Metro; the departments of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs; Health; and Employment and Labour to monitor the process, and advise and support where necessary. The committee hopes that this structure’s work will lead to a positive outcome for the affected communities.
	
	The committee believes that all three spheres of government with responsibility related to this incident should follow up on all the issues arising from today’s meeting and take the necessary action. This is particularly important when it comes to social interaction between government and the affected communities. There must be intervention at the highest level of all three spheres of government to take charge and assist the affected communities. The committee expects action from government, where this is possible and, where there is a need for explanation, the explanation should be given directly to the affected communities.
	
	The committee plans on scheduling a follow-up meeting to determine what government has done in relation to this incident and in interacting with the affected communities. The committee also plans to conduct an oversight visit to Durban as soon as it is possible to do so, to enable it to better understand the situation and to engage with the affected communities. In the meantime, it is important for government to take the lead on action needed in this matter.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES, MR FIKILE XASA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Faith Ndenze (Ms)Parliamentary Communication ServicesTel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 377 0686E-mail: fndenze@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng