Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma led the Policy Debate on the Department of Cooperative Governance’s Adjustment Budget in the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) yesterday. This adjusted budget is meant to ensure municipalities resilience in the face of the coronavirus. Dr Dlamini-Zuma began by pointing out that the government has had to adopt “a risk assessment strategy as a balancing act between saving lives and livelihood”. South Africa has the 25th biggest population in the world, but we are ranked fourth in the world for number of infections, behind the United States, India and Brazil. The pandemic has made us realise that “we cannot hide the conditions in which our people live, that many are still without water and sanitation. They languish in poverty and lack technological infrastructure that proved to be a vital response against the pandemic.” The minister decried the underperformance of many municipalities and urged the NCOP to intervene and play its oversight in this regard. She also identified lack of capacity and skills as a contributing factor to unspent infrastructure funds in some municipalities. To ramp up the lack of technical skills and capacity at municipalities, the department has “recruited graduates to assist in turning the fortunes of our municipalities and enhance their capacities to deliver on their service delivery mandates.” The Chairperson of the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance, Mr Thamsanqa Dodovu, spoke next, saying that the pandemic is causing panic and chaos in the financial market and exposes “the weaknesses of governance in the municipalities”. The challenges posed by the pandemic necessitated the adjustment of the department’s budget. This because municipalities are at the coal face of service delivery. Many services provided by municipalities had to be reprioritised in fight the pandemic, while revenue collection declined as people could not pay for services. Commenting on the R20 billion relief fund for municipalities, he assured the house that “we will conduct our oversight to ensure that funds are used to address municipal services that it’s meant for. And every money spent is accounted for.” However, he is concerned by the recent Auditor-General’s report that painted a bleak picture of financial accountability at municipalities. He urged the department to respond strategically to the reports and to exercise its accountability mandate over municipalities. He urged that the budget must be supported to ensure that the department works towards achieving “a responsive, efficient and effective local government”. Much work lies ahead, cautioned Ms Carin Visser (Democratic Alliance, North West). Preventative measures must be put in place to ensure funding is spent responsibly, she said. The department presented plans to ensure that municipalities deliver on their mandate, “but those plans, as indicated by AG recent report, will not be implemented because most municipalities are not capable of abiding by these plans”. “The AG findings show that municipalities are regressing. The NCOP has a duty in this regard and must not only exercise its constitutional mandate for political ends.” We owe it to the Constitution to ensure that this tier of government is effective. Next up was Deputy Minister of Cooperative Governance Mr Parks Tau. He said that Adjusted Appropriation Bill seeks to balance business continuity and redirecting funds to Covid-19 socio-economic challenges. In his view, this budget has remodelled economic growth around municipalities. There is an urgent need to build municipal resilience, he said. “The District Development Model seeks to deal with some of the challenges that municipalities are faced with and seeks to foster resilience in our local government … the NCOP has a critical role to play in this regard through its legislative and oversight mandates.” The 20 billion relief fund will be mismanaged, as we speak out of 257 only 20 had unqualified report outcomes, said Mr Franszouis du Toit (Freedom Front Plus, North West). The irony, he pointed out, “is that the same officials of the same municipalities with qualified audit outcomes will be charged with the task of overseeing the R20 billion relief fund. As attested by the AG report, these funds will be spent without regard to standard expenditure procedures.” Mr Sam Zandamela (Economic Freedom Fighters, Mpumalanga) decried the department’s amendment of lockdown regulations despite the spike in infections. “Despite our persistent warning, government took an ill-advised step that put profit before lives by opening up the economy despite the hike in infections.” He further added: “Our call against the resale of alcohol and subsequent banning of its sale have vindicated our stance.” About the readjusted budget he claimed that “it would not serve its purpose, because financial accountability of most municipalities has collapsed, as shown by the recent AG report.” The adjusted budget should inspire us to make real change in local municipalities, said Mr Bheke Stofile, of the South African Local Government Association (Salga). “This adjusted budget seeks to effect change. The silver lining of the crisis is its ability to unearth the “resilience of the intergovernmental cooperation, which proved that we can function as a coherent government to short circuit decision-making processes and address critical challenges of the pandemic we are faced with.” During this period, the role of the department has become more pronounced than ever. “This is the role we would like to see the department play in the future to instil the cooperative spirit in our municipalities going forward.” He did admit that the pandemic has placed huge financial constraints on municipalities. “As a result, many municipalities face liquidity challenges.” But Salga thinks the R20 billion relief fund will go a long way to protect social security and much-needed economic interventions at many municipalities.” This policy debate is fruitless because it tries to bring life to local government, which has long been satisfied as a dead animal, said Mr Mlindi Nhanha (Democratic Alliance, Eastern Cape). “I have been listening to speakers conducting an autopsy on the death of municipalities due to wasteful and fruitless expenditure, but yet the death certificate reads that the cause of the death of these municipalities are natural causes.” The R20 billion relief fund will not serve any tangible purpose because we know that fraud, corruption and lack of capacity will render this intervention meaningless. The recent AG report is a case in point, he said. Abel Mputing 17 July 2020 The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal