Parliament, Tuesday, 28 July 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development, Nkosi Zwelivelile Mandela, welcomes the arrest of three suspects following their alleged involvement in a robbery, kidnapping and murder on a farm in Magogong, outside Hartswater in the Northern Cape.
	
	The three victims, aged 50, 79 and 83 were allegedly attacked and the body of the 50-year-old daughter of the missing couple has since been found.
	
	The Chairperson welcomes the swift action of the South African Police Services (SAPS) and the arrest of three suspects. They must face the full might of the law and our justice system must send out a strong message that there is no place in our democracy for such callous and inhumane acts.
	
	We have repeatedly condemned attacks on farms and farmers as acts of gross criminality that is detrimental to the social cohesion that our young democracy needs.
	
	Our thoughts go out to the family and friends of the victims and we express our heartfelt condolences. We appeal to the SAPS to leave no stone unturned to find the missing couple and to bring the alleged perpetrators of this heinous crime to book.
	
	We appeal to farmers, farm-dwellers and rural communities to always be on the alert and to raise awareness of this troubling phenomenon and to assist in intelligence gathering that may assist in reducing the incidents of violent crime on farms.
	
	We applaud SAPS for its swift response and trust that the early breakthrough in the arrest of suspects sends a strong message to others that crime does not pay and that the full weight of the law shall come down hard on perpetrators of such senseless acts, said the Chairperson.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, LAND REFORM AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT, NKOSI ZWELIVELILE MANDELA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. Inkatha Freedom Party