After the Deputy Minister of Labour, Ms Boitumelo Moloi, briefed the mini plenary session of the Members of the National Assembly on the Department of Labour and Employment’s adjusted budget, MPs from various political parties debated the adjusted budget. Speaking in the debate after Deputy Minister Moloi, the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Labour and Employment, Ms Lindiwe Dunjwa, said although the department’s budget was cut by about R90 million, affecting its labour and industrial policy, the National Treasury must be commended for ensuring that the cuts don’t affect the critical services. In addition, the work of the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) and of the inspectorates are more critical now than they have ever been before and the department must ensure that both are adequately funded to deal with the challenge of unemployment and retrenchments arising from Covid-19. Dr John Cardo of the Democratic Alliance was of the view that the Department of Employment and Labour has been ineffective for the unemployed before and that this will not change, even after the pandemic. “Before the lockdown, there were 10 million people who were unemployed and now there are three million people who lost their jobs due to lockdown regulations.” This number could rocket to 17 million, pushing unemployment from 30% to 50%. “This is a ticking time bomb and the government is doing nothing to dispose it, it instead adds more explosives to it,” Dr Cardo claimed. The DA believes that a raft of strict labour regulations and employment equity legislation are responsible for this situation. “The racial principles introduced to the labour market by this legislation is not compatible with the labour market. “We need to deregulate our labour market to attract investment and to make it easier for companies to employ the labour force,” he said. Ms Natasha Ntlangwini of the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) said: “Before [President] Cyril Ramaphosa took over, we had 27% of unemployment in the country. Under his leadership, we climbed to 30%. The unemployment crisis we are in has nothing to do with Covid-19. We have had a president that presided over the highest number of unemployment rate in history.” The EFF further alleged that the private sector “made lofty promises of job creation during the job summit, [but] have not delivered on their promises while people still desperate for jobs. There were no jobs before Covid-19 and there will be no jobs during and after Covid-19. To support this budget is to support or to celebrate the government for not doing its job”. Speaking for the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) Mr Xolani Ngwezi said: “The department has a critical role to play to ensure that the welfare of the people is protected and the department delivers on its mandate. South Africa must keep working to ensure that there is a healthy balance between keeping the economy going and to ensure the safety and welfare of its citizens.” He urged the department to do more to assist a labour force that is faced with retrenchment and those unable to secure employment. And the department must curtail the large-scale theft and corruption by its employees and employers who defraud it of its Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) money. Mr Wayne Thring of the African Christian Democratic Party (ACDP) said the department’s mandate is to reduce inequality through job creation, but it has failed to execute this mandate. He lamented the huge reduction in the department’s budget. “The reduction of the department’s budget by R3.3 billion was done against the backdrop of a contracting economy that sheds jobs, and research shows that job losses will reach the three million mark.” Of great concern for the ACDP is “the number of reported cases of delays in the payment of the UIF, and of fraud and corruption that could derail the department’s response to socio-economic challenges posed by Covid-19”. There must be consequences for those who corrupt and defraud, as South Africa needs an “honest, clean and efficient administration that will preside over this adjusted budget”. Mr Vuyolwethu Zungula of the African Transformation Movement said the South African Airways, the South African Broadcasting Corporation and Media 24 will soon retrench some of their workers. In the face of this, the department must provide leadership and be patriotic in dealing with job creation. He was adamant that there “should be no policy changes that will accommodate foreign workers when so many South Africans are losing their jobs. If there is any time to be patriotic, it is now. Our people want to be economically active and live a dignified life. They don’t want to eat from the dustbins. Review our work permits, abolish labour brokers and no foreigner should be employed in ordinary jobs that could be filled by South Africans.” Mr Michael Bagraim of the DA said: “We address this policy debate with regret because the department has “failed the workers of South Africa. It has one job, and one job only, to treat employees with care and dignity, but it failed to do so. The much-talked about Compensation Fund has been dysfunctional for decades. The medical profession doesn’t get payment for services rendered to workers and they no longer accept them.” Abel Muting
	22 July 2020 Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo