Parliament, Wednesday, 22 July 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs has resolved to agree with President Cyril Ramaphosa’s determination of a retrospective 0% salary increase for the chairperson and other full-time commissioners of the IEC for the 2019/20 financial year.
	
	Section 7(2) of the Electoral Commission Act 51 of 1996 provides that the IEC’s full- and part-time commissioners are entitled to annual salaries and allowances or benefits, as determined by the President from time to time, by a notice in the gazette, and approved by the National Assembly. A similar salary freeze will thus also apply to part-time commissioners’ daily/hourly rate in 2019/20, over and above the salary freeze applicable to judges.
	
	The committee agreed with the President that, given South Africa’s current economic challenges and the constrained fiscus, a salary freeze is necessary. The committee will recommend to the National Assembly to approve the 0% increase.
	
	Meanwhile, the committee received a detailed outline from the IEC of potential electoral systems, as the committee considers how to make the Electoral Act constitutionally compliant. The committee is well aware of time pressure if the timeframes specified by the Constitutional Court are to be adhered to, hence the emphasis on the matter.
	
	The committee’s unanimous view is that a decision of this magnitude will require extensive consultation with all South Africans in order to reach a generally acceptable option. The committee also highlighted its gratitude for the technical support it is receiving from the IEC.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, ADV BONGANI BONGO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Anybody over the age of 18 can participate indirectly in Parliament simply by voting in the elections. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal