Parliament, Sunday 5 July 2020 – Ministerial briefings by Minister of Health, Dr Zweli Mkhize, to the National Assembly, and by Minister of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation, Ms Lindiwe Sisulu, to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP), form part of Parliament’s programme this week.
	
	Permanent Delegates to the NCOP will receive a virtual briefing by the Minister of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation, Ms Lindiwe Sisulu on Tuesday, at 09:00. The briefing seeks to give progress made by the department in the provision of water and sanitation and also address human settlement related challenges in response to Covid-19 pandemic.
	
	Both Houses of Parliament, the National Council of Provinces and National Assembly will on Wednesday hold plenary sittings to consider the Finance reports on the Revised Fiscal Framework and Revenue Proposals. The Minister of Finance Mr Tito Mboweni tabled the proposed 2020 special adjustment budget before Parliament on 24 June 2020. In tabling the adjustment budget, the Minister met his obligation under section 30 of the Public Finance Management Act 1 of 1999 (PFMA). In addition to that, section 12(1) of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act 9 of 2009 obliges the Minister to submit to Parliament the National Adjustment Budget. The virtual plenary sitting of the NCOP will start at 10 am whilst the NA hybrid sitting will commence at 3pm.
	
	The Minister of Health, Dr Zweli Mkize will also address the NA hybrid plenary sitting on Wednesday to give progress made by the government in response to Covid-19 Pandemic.
	
	On Friday at 3pm, the Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Ms Sylvia Lucas, will continue with the Free State’s second leg of the Women’ Charter Review Sessions (virtual) at the Thabo Mofutsanyane and Xhariep district municipalities. The nationwide virtual sessions are aimed at taking stock of progress made in implementing the articles of the 1994 Women’s Charter for Effective Equality and assess its impact since the advent of freedom and democracy. So far, the Western and Northern Cape have held review sessions. The Free State held its first session last month at the Mangaung District Municipality.
	
	At least 32 Committee Meetings including joint meetings of both houses of Parliament are scheduled to take place virtually from Tuesday to Friday as follows:
	
	TUESDAY, 7 JULY
	
	Joint Meeting: Standing Committee on Finance and Select Committee on Finance: Consideration and adoption of the Committee Report on 2020 Revised Fiscal Framework and the briefing by National Treasury on their updated Strategic and Annual Performance Plan.
	
	Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy: Briefing by the Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy and the department’s adjustment budget allocations – financial and non-financial and its impact on delivery programmes.
	
	Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs: Briefing by the Department of Home Affairs on its Adjusted 2020/21 Budget and the briefing by the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC) and the Government Printing Works (GPW) on their Adjusted 2020/21 Budget.
	
	Joint Meeting: Portfolio Committee on Basic Education and Select Committee on Education and Technology, Sport, Arts and Culture: Interaction Statutory Bodies on proposed allocations and possible adjustments i.e. South African Council for Educators (SACE), Council for Quality Assurance in General and Further Education and Training (Umalusi), Department of Basic Education (DBE).
	
	WEDNESDAY, 08 JULY 2020
	
	Joint Meeting: Portfolio Committee on Health and Select Committee on Health and Social Services: Briefing by the Department of Health on the Adjusted Budget.
	
	Joint Meeting: Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises and Select Committee on Public Enterprises and Communication: Briefing by Department of Public Enterprises on the implications of the Adjustments Appropriation Bill on the programmes and budget of the department.
	
	Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Briefing by Department of Public Works and Infrastructure on the implementation of corrective measures emanating from an investigation conducted into allegations of irregularities related to services procured by the Department for official funeral services.
	
	THURSDAY, 09 JULY 2020
	
	Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs: Briefing by the Department of Traditional Affairs on its adjusted budgets.
	
	Joint Meeting: Select Committee on Appropriations and Standing Committee on Appropriations: Briefing by Financial and Fiscal Commission and South African Local Government Association (Salga) on the 2020 Division of Revenue Amendment Bill and the 2020 Adjustments Appropriation Bill.
	
	Portfolio Committee on Tourism: Briefing by the Department of Tourism on revised budget allocation and the implications on the Strategic Plan.
	
	FRIDAY, 10 JULY 2020
	
	Portfolio Committee on Small Business Development: Presentations by the Department of Small Business Development, Small Enterprise Development Agency and Small Enterprise Finance Agency on their amended Strategic Plans/Corporate Plan and Annual Performance Plans (Performance Indicators and budget).
	
	Joint Meeting: Select Committee on Appropriations and Standing Committee on Appropriations: Public hearing and consultation with Parliamentary Budget Office (PBO) on the 2020 Division of Revenue Amendment Bill.
	
	Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration: Briefing by the Statistics South Africa on the revised 2019/2024 Strategic Plan and Annual Performance Plan for 2020/2021 financial year. Briefing by the Department of Planning Monitoring and Evaluation and Brand South Africa on the revised 2019/2024 Strategic Plan and Annual Performance Plans for 2020/2021 financial year.
	
	Joint Meeting: Portfolio Committee on Environment, Forestry and Fisheries and Select Committee on Land Reform, Environment, Mineral Resources and Energy: Briefing by the Department of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries on the special adjustments to Budget Vote 32 and revisions to the Strategic Plan, and Annual Performance Plans.
	
	For a full list of the Committees, visit Parliament’s website www.parliament.gov.za
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email: mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga