Delegates to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) expressed concerns during a virtual budget debate on Basic Education regarding a decrease in provincial conditional grants due to redirection of funds to Covid-19-related expenditure. Delivering her budget vote speech in the NCOP yesterday, the Minister of the Department of Basic Education, Ms Angie Motshekga, told NCOP delegates that her department had to reprioritise its plans due to budget cuts. The department’s baseline budget was reduced by R2.1 billion, while those of the provincial departments combined were reduced by R1.5 billion. This is an overall decrease in the baseline for the basic education sector of R3.6 billion. These cuts contributed towards the R500 billion stimulus package announced by President Cyril Ramaphosa. Minister Motshekga informed the NCOP that the raging debate on whether schools should be closed because of the Covid-19 involves all stakeholders, including parents. The department presented all these views to the Covid-19 National Command Team for the Cabinet to take a decision on the matter. The Chairperson of Select Committee on Education and Technology, Sports, Arts and Culture, Mr Mamagase Elleck Nchabaleng, said the infrastructure backlog would be further affected, as funds now have to be diverted to Covid-19-related expenses. “This may result in the suspension or termination of some planned infrastructure projects.” Participating in the debate, the Gauteng MEC for Education, Mr Panyaza Lesufi also expressed concerns about the budget cuts. “The reduction of the infrastructure budget across all provinces is cause for concern. Furthermore, the reduction of the conditional grant is also concerning as this grant is also used to support programmes like maths and science.” Mr Lesufi said the advice on the schooling sector relating to Covid-19 has always been expert driven and expert guided. “Our advice has always been expert driven. We depend on expert advice. Our advice should remain expert driven and not economic driven.” Ms Delmaine Christians of the Democratic Alliance (DA) said it is for the benefit of the country's children that schools remain open and are adequately provided for. The DA believes the benefits of opening the schools exceed the negatives, and that closing schools will be disastrous for poor communities without resources such as internet. “The longer our children are deprived of education, the poorer our nation will become,” Ms Christians said. Although this view was shared by some political parties, others felt it is not to the benefit of learners to continue with schooling during what they described as the “peak” of the pandemic in August and September. Ms Seneanye Lehihi of the Economic Freedom Fighters said: "We demand that all schools remain closed. When we had 100 confirmed cases of Covid-19 infections, we closed schools. Now we have more than 10 000 daily infection cases and we want to open school. This is murderous.” The EFF rejected the adjusted budget. Mr Simo Mfayela of the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) said his party has, from the start, warned against the opening of the schools as schools, particularly in the rural areas, which are not prepared for Covid-19. The IFP also has questions about the reprioritisation of the conditional grants supporting mathematics, science and technology programmes. “We need to ensure that no child is left behind as we deal with the pandemic,” he added. Rajaa Azzakani
	22 July 2020 Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo