Parliament, Thursday, 9 July 2020 – The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) Deputy Chairperson, Ms Sylvia Lucas will tomorrow, Friday, 10 July, continue with the second leg of the virtual session of the 1994 Women’s Charter Review in the Thabo Mofutsanyane and Xhariep Districts, Free State province.
	
	The nationwide virtual sessions are aimed at taking stock of progress made in implementing the articles of the 1994 Women’s Charter for Effective Equality and assess its impact since the advent of freedom and democracy. So far, the Western and Northern Cape have held review sessions. The Free State held its first session last month at the Mangaung District Municipality.
	
	Details of the event are as follows: 
	Date: Friday, 10 July 2020
	Venue: Virtual platform
	Time: 15:00
	
	Members of the media who wish to interview the leader of the delegation, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Ms Sylvia Lucas can contact Manelisi Ntsodo on 081 716 2021.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow the virtual session live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408) and via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. Freedom Front Plus on the provincial list for the province of Free State