Parliament, Wednesday, 15 July 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Police has today resolved to confirm the nomination of Ms Jennifer Dikeledi Ntlatseng as the Executive Director of the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid) and will recommend to the National Assembly to support the nomination. The appointment is historic in the sense that it is the first time that a female candidate has been appointed to this position under the Ipid Act (2011).
	
	The support of the nominated candidate for appointment to the executive director position for IPID is in terms of section 6 of the Independent Police Investigative Directorate Act, 2011 (Act No 1 of 2011).
	
	The committee is of the view that the candidate has the requisite skills and experience to lead Ipid to greater heights and will ensure effective oversight over the police. The committee is also satisfied that the appointment process was robust and thorough, leading to the appointment of a candidate who understands the scope of the work. The committee is convinced that the best candidate was nominated.
	
	Meanwhile, the committee has instructed the Ministry of Police to submit a comprehensive report for the committee’s next meeting on why there was a breach of Section 6 (5) of the Ipid Act in the delay in introducing the nominee to Parliament. The committee will also await a comprehensive vetting report on the candidate.
	
	In terms of the Ipid Act, the committee agreed that there was a need for a wide-ranging amendment of the Ipid Act to ensure that it is responsive to the current environment and addresses identified gaps.
	
	Meanwhile, the committee received and considered a legal opinion relating to communication from the Helen Suzman Foundation regarding a Supreme Court of Appeal, namely Helen Suzman Foundation v Minister of Police and others (SCA case no: 1065/2019). The committee, having considered legal advice, is of the view that the appeal does not prevent the process of filling the vacancy.
	
	The committee will recommend that the National Assembly adopts the report.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MS TINA JOEMAT-PETTERSSON.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape