Parliament’s Portfolio Committee on Tourism today met with South African Tourism (SAT) to discuss the impact of the recent adjustment of the national budget on the entity’s allocation and strategic plans. The SAT board and management, as well the Minister and Deputy Minister of Tourism, appeared in a virtual meeting of the portfolio committee to brief Members of Parliament on the revised allocations, forced by the Covid-19 pandemic, on the plans of the entity. In a presentation to the committee, the Chief Executive Officer of SAT, Mr Sisa Ntshona, said though tourism has performed well in recent years, Covid-19 has disrupted the sector and has led to the need for a strategy to restart the sector. He said tourism has been assessed as primarily a level 1 activity within the country’s risk framework, with some operations marginally permissible in level 2, and the prevailing view therefore is that the sector will remain inactive for the better part of the 2020/21 fiscal year. SAT has reduced budgeted spend significantly, focusing on creative initiatives that will position the organisation to best support the recovery. Tourism Minister, Ms Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane, said it was important for the country to contain the virus, and that once it is contained it will give confidence to global tourists to start planning to visit South Africa again post-Covid-19. Committee Chairperson, Mr Supra Mahumapelo, thanked SAT and the department for their effort in adjusting the plans and budget accordingly, and said the changes did not mean that any aspects and programmes in the budget that are adjusted or put on hold, were no longer important. “We need to communicate the message that the plans and programmes that have been compromised by the readjustment of the budget as forced by the Covid-19 pandemic, does not mean those aspects are not important, they are still relevant, it is just difficult decisions had to be made,” said Mr Mahumapelo. As part of post-Covid-19 plans, SAT told the committee that a database of new tourism attraction was being developed with emphasis on “villages, townships and small dorpies” as drivers of domestic tourism. The entity also said when the sector reopens, traffic will be directed to the small dorpies and the new attractions that haven’t been previously widely marketed. A suggestion for the department to consider proposing “medical health tourism” in the Covid-19 command council was shot down by Deputy Tourism Minister, Mr Fish Mahlalela, who said such a move was discouraged by the World Health Organisation due to the nature of the pandemic and that South Africa does not have enough beds. “If we allow more people from outside to come for medical care, there will be a crisis,” warned the Deputy Minister. Mr Mahumapelo said the committee was not insisting on the idea of attracting tourists to come for medical care and also enjoy the attraction, but just suggesting for it to be discussed in the command council. “It must be based on risk and capacity, ongoing analysis and country to country relations and agreements,” said the committee Chairperson. By Sakhile Mokoena 14 July 2020 The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo