Parliament, Wednesday, 8 July 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans was today briefed on the impact of the adjusted estimates of national expenditure on the Department of Defence (DOD) (Vote 23), the Department of Military Veterans (Vote 26) and its entities.
	
	The committee welcomes the R3 million funding relief provided from the DOD to the Castle Controls Board (CCB), which will ease some of the financial pressures faced by the entity due to the impact of Covid-19 on the tourism industry. The committee heard that this funding will improve the entity’s cash flow position and ensure that it remains somewhat functional up until December 2020, at which time the CCB hopes to return to full operation.
	
	The committee applauds the Armaments Corporation of South Africa (Armscor) for reorganising its budget to effect savings to absorb the impact of the R120 million reduction in its budget. However, the impact on acquisition activities is of particular concern since Armscor runs the risk of having to terminate key projects such as Project Biro and Project Hotel, on which Armscor had already spent massive amounts. The committee also heard that the risk associated with the termination of these contracts could also attract penalty payments.
	
	The committee also received a presentation on the R137 million reduction in the budget of the Department of Military Veterans (DMV), which includes a R60 million reduction in the education support provided to military veterans and their beneficiaries. The committee has heard that the DMV plans on mitigating this impact by engaging the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) about support for students, as well as engaging the Provincial Departments of Education for financial relief for military veterans.
	
	The committee encouraged the departments and their entities to ensure that their revised Annual Performance Plans (APPs) and Strategic Plans are in line with the adjusted budgets, and reflect the adjusted targets for ease of monitoring.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS, MR CYRIL XABA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 063 503 2364
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Anybody over the age of 18 can participate indirectly in Parliament simply by voting in the elections. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape