The portfolio and the select committees on health received a briefing on the state of health services in the Eastern Cape from the Eastern Cape’s project management unit (PMU) yesterday in a virtual joint meeting. Making opening remarks to the joint meeting, the Minister of Health, Dr Zweli Mkhize told the joint meeting that although the Eastern Cape has many challenges, they are not beyond the capacity of the provincial Department of Health or the PMU. The committees were also briefed by the MEC for Health, Ms Sindiswa Gomba, and members of the PMU, under the leadership of Dr Sibongile Zungu. PMU is a support team of experts that was appointed Dr Mkhize to assist the province with its Covid-19 interventions. Dr Zungu briefed the committees on epidemiological projections, surgical capacity, human resource management, supply of oxygen, data collection tools and ambulances. She painted a picture of lack of capacity in the provincial public healthcare in each and every area of the provincial healthcare system. During the discussions, members of the committees asked Dr Mkhize when the national Department of Health will apply section 100 of the Constitution, as the Eastern Cape Department of Health is unable to deal with the pandemic. Dr Mkhize responded by saying that there is no need for that intervention at the moment and he read the Constitution to outline when such an intervention is mandated. Members of the committees told Ms Gomba and Dr Zungu that the time for planning is over. It is now time for implementation and saving people’s lives. They also demanded timeframes from MEC Gomba and Dr Zungu. One committee member, Ms Sive Gwarube, said the province has no clear response to Covid-19 and that the PMU’s presentation lacks timelines. In addition, referring rural patients to metros made no sense, as metro facilities are already overwhelmed. Members also wanted more explanation about Nelson Mandela Metro’s Dora Nginza and Livingston hospitals, which have been in the news for all the wrong reasons. Ms Gomba was asked to explain the problem of scooters bought by the Eastern Cape Department of Health to transport patients from rural communities to hospitals. In response Ms Gomba said the procurement of scooters had already been explained by Premier Oscar Mabuyane. On the problem of the lack of oxygen at hospitals, Dr Mkhize told the committees that the Department of Health is negotiating with manufacturers to ensure that provincial hospitals have sufficient supply. The issues raised by the committees on staffing, ambulances, corruption, shortages in oxygen supply, and other infrastructure challenges are matters that the Department of Health is well versed in and are being attended to by the province. The Chairperson for the Portfolio Committee on Health, Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, said even though the PMU’s report lacked detail, it is reassuring to receive reports on the work being done in the province. After the committee’s oversight in the Eastern Cape in June this year, the Chairperson has noted significant progress. “We are not happy with certain things that are happening, but we commend the work that is being done by the PMU,” he said. Mava Lukani
	22 July 2020 Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng