Parliament, Thursday, 23 July 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Communications was briefed by the Communication Workers’ Union (CWU); the Broadcasting, Electronic, Media and Allied Workers’ Union (Bemawu); and the Editorial Forum of the South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) on the SABC’s intention to implement section 189 of the Labour Relations Act (LRA). The committee reaffirmed its position of 25 June 2020 that retrenchments at this stage are premature.
	
	It became clear to the committee during the presentations that the SABC management issued notices of retrenchment before conducting an open and transparent skills audit or consulting with relevant stakeholders. The committee then reiterated that the SABC should start the process again, from the beginning.
	
	The committee was first briefed on the SABC’s turnaround strategy by the Minister and Deputy Minister of Communications and Digital Technologies, as well as the SABC Board and management on 25 May 2020. In this meeting, the committee expressed the need for more time to engage with the department and the SABC. It invited both parties to a meeting on 21 July to be briefed on the section 189 question.
	
	This meeting took place and, having listened to the introductory remarks by the Deputy Minister, the committee discovered that the SABC did not consult with stakeholders and therefore, was not in possession of all the answers on the subject. The committee resolved that SABC management should hold proper consultations before presenting on the section 189 process.
	
	After listening to the labour unions yesterday, the committee became more resolute than ever that retrenchments should be put on hold to allow engagements with all stakeholders in a transparent manner.
	
	Committee Chairperson Mr Boyce Maneli said that the committee supports the government’s position that every effort should be made to save jobs in all sectors of the economy and that retrenchments should be a last resort. The committee will invite the SABC to a meeting to discuss the consultation process.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE COMMUNICATIONS, MR BOYCE MANELI
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committees’ Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape