Parliament, Tuesday, 7 July 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy was briefed on the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy’s revised budget for the 2020/21 financial year, subsequent to the Minister of Finance’s Revised Fiscal Framework.
	
	The committee will consider its report regarding the department’s revised budget on Tuesday, 14 July. On 2 June 2020, the committee adopted the department’s budget of R9.3 billion for the current financial year, notwithstanding the minority’s opinion. The budget has now been revised to R7.8 billion.
	
	The committee raised a concern about the biggest budget cut on the Integrated National Electrification Programme (INEP), in which there has been R1 billion reduction from the initial allocation of R3 billion on the programme. The committee’s concern is that a projected connection target of 180 000 has now been decreased by 43 000, and that the provinces with the most electrification backlogs will be affected. Those provinces are KwaZulu-Natal, Eastern Cape and Limpopo.
	
	The committee further raised a concern with regards to the continued absence of the Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy at its meetings with the department. The Acting Chairperson, Mr Mikateko Mahlaule, mentioned that the matter is a general concern across the board in Parliament and has been brought to the attention of the Deputy President as leader of government business. Accordingly, the committee awaits intervention from the Deputy President.
	
	Lastly, the committee resolved that the department should return to present on rationalisation of entities, the role of consultants, the number of mines affected by Covid-19-positive cases and the use of the Unemployment Insurance Fund at all the mines.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MR MIKATEKO MAHLAULE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 748
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. Democratic Alliance