Parliament, Friday, 17 July 2020 - The Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP), Ms Sylvia Lucas, and the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly (NA), Mr Lechesa Tsenoli, will today, Friday, 17 July host a virtual Lecture in commemoration of Tata Nelson Mandela International Day.
	
	The virtual lecture is themed, “Each one Teach One - the Power to Transform the World: Mandela in Conversation with Palestine". Two renowned academics are scheduled to address the lecture, Mr Ran Greenstein, an associate professor of sociology at the University of the Witwatersrand who has published extensively on conflict in Palestine and Mr Na’eem Jeenam an academic, author, community leader, and public intellectual.
	
	Also scheduled for tomorrow, is the last leg of the 1994 Women’s Charter Review virtual sessions in Free State Province in the Fezile Dabi and Lejweleputswa District Municipalities. to take place at 15:00.
	
	So far, the Western and Northern Cape have successfully completed the review sessions.
	
	DEATAILS OF EVENTS:
	
	The Nelson Mandela Virtual Lecture 
	Date: Friday, 17 July 2020
	Venue: Virtual platform
	Time: 10:00 - 12:00
	
	Free State 1994 Provincial Women’s Charter Review Session:
	Date: Friday, 17 July 2020
	Venue: Virtual platform
	Time: 15:00
	
	Members of the media who wish to interview, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Ms Sylvia Lucas or Deputy Speaker of the NA, Mr Lechesa Tsenoli can contact Mr. Manelisi Ntsodo on 081 716 2021.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow the virtual session live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408) and via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga