The National Assembly Programme Committee discussed issues ranging from the inception of the panel to consider the Public Protector’s fitness to hold office, to petitions on gender-based violence bills set to come before Parliament. Members asked about the process of nominating the panel to review the Public Protector’s fitness to hold office. The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms Thandi Modise, replied that she had asked political parties to nominate people to serve on the panel. “The nominations were received and we approached potential panellists. One indicated availability and, up to now, there have been four declines. The matter is on-going as soon as they affirm their availability.” The Speaker mentioned that MPs who declined to serve, did so because of a possible conflict of interest. “We are relooking at the second round of approaching the people that were nominated, but if we don’t get this process right, we will come back to parties to resubmit names.” Another matter before the committee is the suggestion that Parliament should consider establishing a multiparty youth caucus, as is the case for women. Ms Modise explained the differences between the two. The women’s caucus caters for the specific needs of women, brought by the various political parties, to advance the work of the Women’s Charter. “When we were enacting laws, we saw a need for such a process to have women voices, because at the time there was no ministry of women looking after women issues. We formed the caucus to strengthen the women voices and to be a lobby, a go-to structure for women issues.” The need for a youth caucus is now a viable option, given the fact that there are now so many young parliamentarians, she said. “We need to consider a structure like this. But we must openly discuss its possibility. Now there is a portfolio committee for women may be we need to discuss the possibility of a youth committee.” Ms Modise also commented on the need for young parliamentarians to participate in the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). “We need to give young parliamentarians their space. They should be properly mandated. We need to get to that discussion very fast.” A long standing matter of petitions also came up in the meeting. MP Mr Hope Papo contended that the way petitions are dealt with must be clarified so that due process is followed before they are sent to the relevant committee or department. “Metros have their own petitions processes. The petitions processes must start there, from the local level. Even MPs should assist members of the public to lodge them locally or provincially first, before bringing them before Parliament. People should not be allowed to by-pass these processes.” The House Chairperson of Committee, Mr Cedric Frolick, then mentioned that the parliamentary oversight model is clear about the processes related to the handling of public petitions. “We can’t stop people submitting petitions to Members of Parliament. We need to ensure that they are processed accordingly. But also we must guard against this important instrument to ensure that it’s not abused for political purposes.” The Public Education Section of Parliament must educate the public about the system and processes related to the submission of petitions, said the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly Mr Lechesa Tsenoli. “We must communicate with the public to ensure that it understands the processes that should be followed when they want to lodge a petition.” The Secretary of the National Assembly, Mr Masibulele Xaso, admitted that “what is lacking currently are guidelines of how petitions are processed, tracked, monitored and evaluated. We have commenced a process that will come before the rules committee to address this matter.” Incorrectly channelled petitions is part of the problem, reckoned Ms Modise. “Before we channel petitions to committees, we write to the mayor where the petitions emanate from to create his/her awareness about the said petition and their action plan. It only becomes a committee matter when the said matter is not satisfactorily dealt with. Generally, it’s those petitions that don’t follow this process that often create problems.” Bills before Parliament on gender-based violence (GBV) were also discussed. At the moment, 11 bills are before Parliament dealing with GBV from the point of view of justice, police, social development, criminal to social security laws. Committee member Ms Ntombovuyo Mente said she detected some reluctance on Parliament’s part to address the issue. “Just recently three perpetrators of GBV have been given bail, they have been released. That is how sympathetic we are to criminals.” We need to interrogate if these bills before Parliament will achieve what we want them to achieve “to ensure that law does not allow such perpetrators to be granted bail to be back in our communities.” It would help to request Cabinet to provide Parliament with all legislation it intends to introduce to the house with timelines, said another committee member, Ms Natasha Mazzone. “In that way we can have firm grasp and timeline of these bills, to monitor them and be up to speed with their update.” There was also a suggestion from Ms Charlotte Pilane-Majake to solicit public opinion on how to address GBV. “Legislation on GBV comes in dribs and drabs, but the question is: will they finally deal with the scourge of GBV violence? We need to consult the public on what can and cannot be done. Get information that can guide our legislation process.” Mr Papo had a differing view. “If we go back to public consultation, that may create an impression that we really don’t want to act on this scourge. We have just had a summit on GBV and a national strategic plan came out of that process … the summit spoke on the need to amend laws and to tighten them up to stem the tide of GBV.” We may quarrel about the delay of these bills in our parliamentary processes, but they are work in progress, Mr Tsenoli assured members of the committee. “There is no need to go back to consult the public regarding GBV. We will consult during public hearings. But legislation is just one part in the fight against GBV.” He admitted, though, that “we need to accelerate the process of their approval”. He further added, “Such bills should have an integrated strategy that would deal with various issues that contribute to the GBV in order for them to have the desired effects.” Abel Mputing
	16 July 2020 Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape