Parliament, Friday, 24 July 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education, Ms Bongiwe Mbinqo-Gigaba, welcomes Cabinet decision of four weeks break for schools.
	
	Ms Mbinqo-Gigaba said, Cabinet clearly applied its mind after careful consideration of all the inputs it received on the matter. “I am aware that the Minister of Basic Education and her team have been consulting with stakeholders in the sector. Furthermore, consultations also took place outside the sector as dealing with the pandemic requires a multi-sectoral approach.”
	
	Schooling commenced since June for several grades after the lockdown was announced in March this year. Minister Angie Motshekga has indicated that the break will allow schools to prepare for the return of more grades in school later in August.
	
	“The Department has clearly listened to all the stakeholders and experts. It is clear the Cabinet and the government have acted on expert advice to ensure safety of all. Government has heard the call of all concerned citizens. In doing so, the lives and health of the citizens have outweighed any other consideration at this time,” said Ms Mbinqo-Gigaba.
	
	She called on all the parents and school caretakers to put the health of learners first and deepen the culture of adherence to health protocols of social distancing, wearing of facemask and regular washing of hands at schools to ensure their safety. She further called for distance learning to continue where no face-to-face schooling takes place.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINQO-GIGABA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committees’ Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal