Parliament, Sunday 12 July 2020 – Following Parliament’s adoption of the 2020 Revised Fiscal Framework, focus is now on the supplementary 2020 Adjustments Budget, tabled on 24 June.
	
	National Council of Provinces (NCOP) plenary sittings, this week, are scheduled to debate Adjustments Budgets of four government departments.
	
	At its Tuesday sitting, the NCOP is scheduled to have debates on the Adjustments Budgets of the Department of Health and of the Department of Social Development. Thursday’s sitting is scheduled to have debates on the Adjustments Budgets of the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs and of the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure.
	
	On Wednesday and Friday, the NCOP is scheduled to host Women’s Charter Review sessions.
	
	The sessions are being held to assess progress in implementing the 1994 Women’s Charter for Effective Equality. Sessions are planned for all provinces and have so far been completed in the Northern Cape and the Western Cape.
	
	The NCOP, on Wednesday, is scheduled to host a session to consider: “Women Occupying Senior Positions in the Public and Private sector”. On Friday, a Women’s Charter Review session is scheduled for the Fezile Dabi and Lejweleputswa Districts in the Free State.
	
	The NA, at its plenary sitting on Wednesday, is provisionally scheduled to consider the 2020 Division of Revenue Amendment Bill. This Bill, among other things, allocates funds raised nationally among the national, provincial and local spheres of government for a particular financial year. The sitting is also scheduled to consider designation of a National Assembly Member to the Magistrates Commission.
	
	Adjusted budgets of state entities also feature for scrutiny and consideration at most committee meetings scheduled for the week. Other issues scheduled include matters related to COVID-19, legislation, local government elections in 2021, a petition and appointments to statutory bodies.
	
	The 44 committee meetings, scheduled from Monday to Friday, include:
	
	MONDAY, 13 JULY 
	Select Committee on Health and Social Services: Consideration and adoption of the following reports – Adjusted Budget Vote 18: Department of Health; Adjusted Budget Vote 19: Department of Social Development, South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) and the National Development Agency (NDA)
	
	TUESDAY, 14 JULY 
	Joint Meeting of Standing Committee on Finance and Select Committee on Finance: Briefing by National Treasury and SA Revenue Service on the Disaster Management Tax Relief Bill and Disaster Management Tax Administration Bill
	
	Standing Committee on Appropriations: Consideration and Adoption of Committee’s draft report on the 2020 Division of Revenue Amendment Bill. Overview of the 2020 Adjustments Appropriation Bill by the Committee Researchers and Content Advisor
	
	Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs: Briefing by Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC) on their readiness for the Local Government Elections in 2021
	
	Joint Meeting of Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs and Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Water and Sanitation and Human Settlements: Briefing by Department of Co-operative Governance on its adjusted budgets; and Local Government: Municipal Systems Amendment Bill
	
	Portfolio Committee on Communications (Subcommittee): Briefing Subcommittee on outcome of Media Development and Diversity Agency (MDDA) interviews
	
	Portfolio Committee on Communications: Consideration of report on the outcome of MDDA interviews. Adoption of the Adjusted Budget Vote 4 and Adjusted Budget Vote 30 Reports
	
	WEDNESDAY, 15 JULY
	Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development: Consideration of the Committee report on the revised Strat Plan and APP of Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development (DALRRD) through the Adjusted Appropriation Bill. DALRRD update on implementation of Constitutional Court judgments on labour tenants and update on development and finalisation of Farmer Register in all provinces
	
	Portfolio Committee on Police: Consideration and adoption of adjustments budget reports of the South African Police Service (SAPS), Civilian Secretariat for Police Service (CSPS) and Independent Police Investigative Directorate (IPID). Briefing by Minister of Police on appointment of Executive Director of IPID
	
	Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs: Briefing on Petition from residents of Ward 52 in eThekwini Metropolitan Municipality (Ms HO Mkalipi)
	
	THURSDAY, 16 JULY
	Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs: Briefing by Eastern Cape Provincial Government on their COVID-19 response plans
	
	FRIDAY, 17 JULY
	Select Committee on Appropriations: Consideration of Negotiating Mandates on the 2020 Division of Revenue Amendment Bill
	
	Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs: Meeting with the City of Cape Town Metropolitan Municipality: Follow-up on issues raised in meeting of 3 July 2020; report on outcome of investigation into conduct of law enforcement officials during evicting; Human settlements plan
	
	For the latest full schedule of committee meetings (updated regularly) please go to: https://www.parliament.gov.za
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape