Parliament, Thursday, 9 July 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation was yesterday briefed on the impact of the revised budget vote (Vote 6) on the Department of International Relations and Cooperation and its entity, the African Renaissance Fund. The committee welcomed the revisions to the department’s plans aimed at responding to the Covid-19 pandemic and the adjusted budget tabled by the Minister of Finance on 24 June 2020.
	
	The department’s initial allocation of R6 850 billion has been revised downward by National Treasury to R6 533 billion, to accommodate the President’s announcement of a fiscal package of R500 billion to cushion the impact of the pandemic. The committee noted that the reduction is mainly on goods and services, and on the capital infrastructure budget.
	
	The committee welcomed the fact that no revisions are required for the department’s strategic and annual performance plans, as the targets are output and outcome focused. Changes will only be made at the operational level where activities are targeted. The outcomes, outcome indicators and five-year targets remain as set.
	
	The committee Chairperson, Ms Tandi Mahambehlala, highlighted that the committee had recommended that the department establish a work stream on property management in order to fully implement the Foreign Service Act. She is concerned that the department has opted to defer the implementation of the capital projects in order to allow more time to revise the infrastructure implementation plan. As a result, Ms Mahambehlala pointed out, National Treasury has agreed that R199 million will be reprioritised.
	
	The committee urged the department to do everything possible to ensure continued delivery on South Africa’s mandates as the current Chair of the African Union (AU). It also urged the department to draw up an implementation plan to address the challenges of remaining within budget limits on the compensation of employees, taking into consideration the impact of foreign currency fluctuations on the department’s budget.
	
	Ms Mahambehlala also noted some positive movement on the ICT issue, after the department reported that it has started implementing the recommendations of a task team on modernising obsolete ICT infrastructure. Modernising the ICT systems is central to facilitating the department’s work, Ms Mahambehlala said, and the pandemic provides additional impetus to the modernisation plans with minimum disruptions.
	
	In addition, a reduced budget need not translate into fewer international engagements, due to the affordances provided by virtual platforms.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND COOPERATION, MS TANDI MAHAMBEHLALA
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Anybody over the age of 18 can participate indirectly in Parliament simply by voting in the elections. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga