Parliament, Tuesday, 14 July 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy has adopted its report on the adjustment budget, vote 34 of the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy (DMRE), notwithstanding minority opinion.
	
	The committee was first briefed on the department’s revised budget for the 2020/21 financial year on 7 July 2020, subsequent to the Minister of Finance’s Revised Fiscal Framework tabled on 24 June 2020.
	
	The department’s budget has been reduced by R1.5 billion from the initial R9.3 billion, owing to the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. The revised annual budget for the current financial year is R7.8 billion.
	
	The committee raised a concern about the biggest budget cut on the Integrated National Electrification Programme (INEP), in which there has been R1 billion reduction from the initial allocation of R3 billion. This budget cut means that the projected target of connecting 180 000 households in the current financial year has now been decreased by 43 000 households.
	
	It is against this backdrop that the committee is concerned that three provinces with the most electrification backlogs will be affected. The provinces are KwaZulu-Natal, Eastern Cape and Limpopo.
	
	The committee has recommended that the department should develop a mitigating strategy to ensure that it spends all the INEP grant on time, in order to avoid funds being reallocated or rolled over. Furthermore, the committee encouraged the department to consult with the National Treasury for additional funding for the programme, prior to the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement to be tabled in September 2020.
	
	The committee Chairperson, Mr Sahlulele Luzipo, said adequate funding on the INEP is of critical importance because it is one of the few service delivery programmes in the department which addresses much needed electrification projects to the South African households.
	
	Also, the committee recommended that the department should increase and promote mine inspections, in order to ensure compliance with government regulations, rules and guidelines on the Covid-19 pandemic. The committee is of the view that increase in infection rates could have devastating consequences for the mining industry.
	
	The committee extended its heartfelt condolences to the families and friends of the late, Mr Frederick Gona, who was a Member of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Mining in the 4th Parliament, and the late, Ms Zindziswa Mandela, who was South Africa’s ambassador to Denmark, as well as an activist of note in her own right.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MR SAHLULELE LUZIPO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 748
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga