NOTE TO EDITORS: Please follow this link to download soundbite of the Spokesperson of Parliament, Mr Moloto Mothapo: https://iono.fm/e/895938
	
	Parliament, Wednesday 22 July 2020 – The Presiding Officers of Parliament, led by National Assembly Speaker Ms Thandi Modise and National Council of Provinces Chairperson Mr Amos Masondo, have learned with deep sadness about the passing-on of Isithwalandwe/Seaparankoe, Dr Andrew Mokete Mlangeni today.
	
	Dr Mlangeni – until now, the only surviving Rivonia trialist – was a revered liberation struggle hero and also founding member of South Africa’s democratic Parliament.
	
	As a Member of Parliament for many years, he served the institution and the people of South Africa well, as a paragon of selflessness, integrity and ethical leadership. Until the end, he remained an unassuming and humble leader, a remarkable patriot and the moral conscience of our nation. South Africa has today lost a Father, a warrior, a logstanding servant and a glue that bound our nation.
	
	“Only last month, we had the honour of celebrating his 95th birthday with him. Little did we know that it was to be the last. We are, indeed, grateful for his selfless life, leadership and for his voice of reason to our Parliament and the nation, in moments of great need. The Big Tree has, indeed fallen,” said the Presiding Officers.
	
	Dr Mlangeni was respected and recognised globally as a champion of peace, social justice, unity and reconciliation. He was an icon of the liberation struggle and had many awards bestowed on him. Among these was the Presidential Order of Merotious Service: Class 1: Gold, which he received from his longtime and trusted comrade, former President Nelson Mandela.
	
	“Even beyond his days with us, we will continue to be inspired by what he stood for, his deep love for his people, his sharp mind and great wisdom.
	
	It is now up to us to advance - with the same fearlessness, courage and resoluteness – his teachings and principles. The greatest honour for his memory is to keep his remarkable and unsurpassed legacy alive,” said Speaker Modise and Chairperson Masondo.
	
	Parliament sends its warm and heartfelt condolences to his family, to his comrades and to the people of South Africa and the world who have been touched by his extraordinary life.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo