Parliament, Wednesday, 15 July 2020 – A joint meeting by the Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) and the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Water and Sanitation and Human Settlements has emphasised the necessity of monitoring and evaluation to ensure that additional funding received by municipalities to fight Covid-19 achieves its intended target.
	
	The committees received a briefing on the adjusted budget for the Department of Cooperative Governance. Both committees welcomed the comprehensive package intended to make an impact at municipal level, especially for infrastructure development inclusive of water and housing. “The additional allocation must leave an indelible mark in the lives of the people of South Africa and must be used for what is intended and not diverted to something else,” said Mr China Dodovu, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	In this regard, the committees welcomed the department’s strong emphasis on effective monitoring in their revised Annual Performance Plan. The emphasis of monitoring and evaluation will ensure service delivery is effective and that elements of corruption are rooted out.
	
	The committees also called on the department to review its target on ensuring the functionality of Municipal Public Accounts Committees (MPAC) and Audit Committees. “The was a strong view that this is an important layer of accountability and the target must reflect the intention to ensure that 100% of the municipalities receive positive audit outcomes, which will enhance service delivery,” Ms Faith Muthambi, the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee.
	
	Both committees welcomed the department’s intention to work with the National Treasury under the umbrella of ‘Rethinking Municipal Finance’ to stabilise municipal finances from a revenue and expenditure perspective, with a view to minimising the impact of Covid-19. Regarding revenue, the committees called for the speedy roll-out of the National Responsible Citizenry Campaign to encourage a culture of payment of services to ensure the viability of municipal finances.
	
	Although the fight against Covid-19 is important currently, both committees urged the department to work with municipalities to put in place post-Covid-19 economic recovery plans that will ensure not only recovery but sustainability of municipalities in the post-pandemic period.
	
	The committees welcomed the indicator on the fight against gender-based violence (GBV) and the intention to ensure that municipalities’ integrated development programme plans are aligned. “The fight against GBV must find relevance in every sphere of government if we are to eradicate it completely. We must hasten to emphasise though that plans must be followed by decisive action if we are to win the war against this scourge,” Mr Dodovu said.
	
	Meanwhile, the meeting resolved to invite Gauteng Province for an update on the province’s plans to fight Covid-19. Some of the issues to be discussed will be progress in implementing the province’s plan to provide hospital beds and deal with the reported expected upsurge to one million cases.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI, AND CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, WATER AND SANITATION AND HUMAN SETTLEMENTS, MR CHINA DODOVU.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committees’ Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. Good Party on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape