Parliament, Saturday, 11 July 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Ms Faith Muthambi, expresses her full support and deep concern following the positive Covid-19 tests for the Premier of Gauteng David Makhura, Job Mokgoro, from North West, and Alan Winde, from the Western Cape.
	
	“As we approach the peak of the corona pandemic it is clear that no one is safe in the country” says Ms Muthambi. On behalf of the committee, Ms Muthambi, called on all South Africans to adhere to the lockdown regulations as these are aimed at protecting the people of South Africa.
	
	With more than 250 600 cases of Covid-19 across the country and 3,860 fatalities Ms Muthambi is calling on all organs of state and frontline workers to ensure that they do everything possible to combat and limit the impact of Covid-19 while continuing with their essential services. “We must not allow the positive tests of Premiers, MECs, Mayors and Councillors to stop service delivery or our drive to defeat the coronavirus.”
	
	Ms Muthambi said she is confident that the lockdown measures imposed by the government, with the support of parliament, would help limit the impact of the coronavirus.
	
	She further expressed her deep sympathy and support for all families who have lost loved ones. Our condolences to the family, colleagues and friends of the late KwaZulu-Natal Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Mr Ricardo Mthembu.
	
	Our wishes for a speedy recovery to the three Premiers and all citizens who are currently ill and hospitalised. We want to remind all people to wear their masks in public, sanitize their hands often and stay at home as far as possible,
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga