Parliament, Monday, 13 July 2020 – The Standing Committee on Finance, together with the Select Committee on Finance will tomorrow morning hold a three-hour virtual meeting, from 09:00 to 12:00, to be briefed by the National Treasury and the South African Revenue Services (Sars) on the Disaster Management Tax Relief Bill and the Disaster Management Tax Administration Bill.
	
	At the same time and also on a virtual platform, the Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy will consider and adopt a report on the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy’s proposed allocations and adjustment budget. The department’s adjustment budget followed the Revised Fiscal Framework tabled by the Minister of Finance on 24 June 2020.
	
	On 2 June 2020, the committee adopted the department’s annual budget of R9.3 billion for the current financial year, notwithstanding the minority’s opinion. That budget is now revised to R7.8 billion.
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. Inkatha Freedom Party on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal