Parliament, Tuesday, 7 July 2020 – The Health Minister, Dr Zweli Mkhize will make a statement in a hybrid sitting of the National Assembly (NA) on the impact of the Coronavirus in the country tomorrow, Wednesday 8 July at 3 pm.
	
	Meanwhile, The National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will tomorrow, respectively, consider reports on the Revised Fiscal Framework for 2020-2021 which was presented in a speech to a hybrid sitting of the National Assembly by the Minister of Finance, Mr Tito Mboweni, on 24 June 2020.
	
	The NCOP’s virtual sitting will start at 10 am while the National Assembly will consider the budget immediately after Dr Zweli Mkhize’s statement.
	
	DETAILS OF THE NA AND NCOP SITTINGS ARE AS FOLLOWS:
	
	NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
	Date: Tomorrow, Wednesday 8 July 2020
	Time: 10am
	Venue: Virtual Platform
	
	NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
	Date: Tomorrow, Wednesday 8 July 2020
	Time: 3pm
	Venue: Hybrid Sitting (National Assembly and virtual platform)
	
	Important to note:
	
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the National Assembly Hybrid Sitting should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email:Mmpindi@parlaiment.gov.za.
	
	Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliamentary precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these sittings or committee meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them. African National Congress