Parliament, Friday, 24 July 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services today welcomed the announcement by the Minister of Justice and Correctional Services about the introduction of three pieces of legislation to address gender-based violence (GBV).
	
	Committee Chairperson Mr Bulelani Magwanishe said the committee has on many occasions highlighted GBV programmes in the department, its entities and in government as a whole, including during the recent budget adjustment process.
	
	His pronouncement follows Minister Ronald Lamola’s budget speech, in which the minister indicated that Parliament will soon have the task of processing three pieces of legislation seeking to address GBV. The legislation will amend the National Sexual Offenders Register, the Domestic Violence Act, and regulate bail conditions for people who are accused of committing a sexual offence. All three will be introduced in August. If passed, the Domestic Violence Bill will make it possible for a person to apply online for a protection order. This will be a leap forward in the fight against GBV and femicide.
	
	Mr Magwanishe hailed this step, as it will make it easier for women to obtain help. “Women in abusive situations are not always able to go to the authorities to obtain the help they need, including protection orders. With the growing use of cellular phones and the internet, it means victims of such atrocities can seek help no matter where they are or what time of the day it is.”
	
	He said the committee will further monitor the introduction of the department’s “Femicide Watch” monitoring system, which will highlight and track violent crimes committed against women.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, MR BULELANI MAGWANISHE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of North West