Parliament, Tuesday, 7 July 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans will tomorrow deliberate on the impact of the Adjusted Estimates of the National Expenditure with the Departments of Defence (Vote 23) and Military Veterans (Vote 26), the Castle Control Board and the Armaments Corporation of South Africa.
	
	The committee will also discuss the financial relief funding for CCB.
	
	Details of the meeting are as follows:
	Date: Wednesday, 08 July 2020
	Time: 09:00
	
	Meanwhile, a joint meeting of the Standing and Select Committees on Appropriations is scheduled to receive a briefing from the National Treasury (NT) on the 2020 Division of Revenue Amendment Bill.
	
	Details of the meeting are as follows:
	Date: Wednesday, 08 July 2020
	Time: 18:00
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 063 503 2364
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng