Parliament, Tuesday, 14 July 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Communications will this evening hold a three-hour virtual meeting, from 18:00 to 21:00, to be briefed by its Sub-Committee on the outcomes of the interviews for candidates to fill vacancies at the Board of the Media Development and Diversity Agency (MDDA). The committee will then consider and adopt a report in this regard. On 22 May 2020, the Sub-Committee shortlisted 20 candidates it later interviewed.
	
	The committee will also consider and adopt a report on the adjusted budgets of vote 4, the Department of Communications and Digital Technologies (DCDT) and vote 30, the Government Communications and Information Systems (GCIS).
	
	Again, the committee will further discuss the letters it received in respect of the appointment of candidates to serve as Councillors of the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa.
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal