Parliament, Wednesday, 29 July 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure has noted the announcement by the Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure on placing the Director-General of the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure (DPWI), Adv Sam Vukela, on precautionary suspension.
	
	The committee has been aware of ongoing allegations regarding irregularities related to state funerals and the appointments of senior management personnel in the department.
	
	The committee welcomes the fact that the Minister, after receiving the delegated powers from the President, initiated investigations by PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) into allegations regarding irregularities related to state funerals, and by the Public Service Commission (PSC) into allegations related to irregularities with the appointments of senior management personnel in the department.
	
	The committee stresses that precautionary suspension not be mistaken as punitive but rather as a necessary step in the process of assessing the truth behind the ongoing allegations. The committee welcomes the precautionary suspension of the Director-General as it gives the department the time and space needed for the internal investigations without interference or the perception of interference.
	
	The precautionary suspension correctly provides the Director-General time to deal with the allegations that have been levelled against him. The committee is certain that the Director-General will do all in his power to cooperate with the department in this process, so that all allegations can be dealt with properly.
	
	The committee wishes the Minister and the department well with the ongoing attempts to fight malpractice and corruption.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE, MS NOLITHA NTOBONGWANA.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. African National Congress