Parliament, Tuesday 14 July 2020 – The National Assembly (NA) will hold a hybrid plenary to consider the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill tomorrow, 15 July 2020 at 15:00.
	
	The aim of the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill (B9-2020) is to amend the Division of Revenue Act 2020 in accordance with the Money Bills and Related Matters Act, 2009 and to provide for matters connected therein.
	
	The NA plenary sitting will also designate a Member to the Magistrates Commission. The Magistrates Commission is a statutory body established in terms of the Magistrates Act, 1993, and section 3 of the Act makes provision for its constitution. In terms of the Act, the Commission shall constitute a total of 27 members with the NA having four representatives.
	
	Also scheduled for tomorrow, Parliament will convene a virtual session, themed “Women occupying senior positions in the public and private sector - Addressing Adverse Impact of The Gender Pay Gap in The Process to Advance Gender Equality”.
	
	The session is part of the 1994 Women Review Charter Session and seeks to assess the number of women represented in decision making positions in both the private and public sector. The session will enable the development of strategic interventions to address sectors that have been slow in implementing gender equity standards.
	
	Key stakeholders expected to be in attendance in the session are representatives from the Department of Women, Children and People with disability, the Financial Fiscal Commission, Gender Commission South Africa, Public Service Commission, South African Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Statistician-General of Statistics South Africa, and the South African Local Government Association (SALGA).
	
	Details of the NA plenary are as follows:
	Date: Wednesday, 15 July 2020
	Time: 15:00
	Venue: National Assembly Chamber and virtual platform
	
	Important to note:
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the National Assembly Hybrid Sitting should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: Mmpindi@parlaiment.gov.za.
	
	Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliamentary precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival.
	
	Details of the virtual Session
	Date: Wednesday, 15 July 2020
	Venue: Virtual platform
	Time: 15:00
	
	Members of the media who wish to interview the leader of the delegation, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Ms Sylvia Lucas can contact Manelisi Ntsodo on 081 716 2021.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament. Freedom Front Plus on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng