Parliament, Wednesday, 15 July 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans, having considered the Special Adjustments Budget of the Department of Defence (DOD) and its entities (Vote 23), as well as the Department of Military Veterans (Vote 26), has today adopted its reports thereon.
	
	The committee welcomes the R2.8 billion net increase in the DOD budget, earmarked for Covid-19-related activities. The committee, however, notes that the compensation of employees remains one of the critical challenges in the department.
	
	The committee is concerned that the department still has a shortfall of R3 billion despite the additional R720 million allocated by the National Treasury. The committee has urged the DOD to engage the National Treasury to find ways to avoid the irregular expenditure on Compensation of Employees.
	
	The committee stressed the importance of fiscal discipline within the department. Given the financial difficulties, the committee calls on the department to speedily embark on a zero-based budgeting process to enhance the efficient utilisation of its resources and improve effectiveness in their application.
	
	The committee is concerned about the Department of Military Veterans’ (DMV’s) inability to spend its budget and meet its targets, as evidenced in the last three years of the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF. It came as no surprise when its budget was slashed by R137 million, leading to a drastic alteration of its programmes. Of particular concern is the R60 million reduction in educational support to military veterans and their dependents, the impact on the establishment and funding of provincial offices (given the central role they play to allow military veterans access to the department); and the accessibility of military veterans to health facilities, especially the military hospitals and sick bays, against the background of the pandemic.
	
	The committee believes that the DMV should focus on minimising the impact of the reduction in education funds while prioritising provincial offices to allow military veterans easy access to the department. The committee further encourages the department to ensure that it supports military veterans to access health facilities all over the country and to ensure that accessing medical facilities is as seamless as possible.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS, MR CYRIL XABA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 063 503 2364
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. African National Congress