Parliament, Wednesday, 20 May 2020 – A joint meeting of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure and the Select Committee on Transport, Public Service and Administration, Public Works and Infrastructure believes that there is a need for legislation that will strengthen the transformation of the construction and built environment sectors of South Africa. This is one of the key functions of respectively the Construction Industry Development Board (CIDB), and the Council for the Built Environment (CBE).
	
	The committees have noted the six months’ time frame that the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure have given both entities to complete the necessary tasks that will propel them to address the issue of transformation. The committees, however, believe that it is necessary to either amend current legislation to make provision for the enforcement of transformation or to come up with new legislation that will address this matter.
	
	The role of both the CBE and CIDB are very important as they regulate and drive development of the construction and built environment sectors. It is for this reason that the committees believe that in order for these entities to be efficient and successful in their task to transform the industry, they have to be strengthened through legislation. The committees would like to urge the Minister and the department to fast-track this process so that these entities can have stronger enforcement and coordination powers.
	
	The committees have requested both the CIDB and CBE to provide a detailed list of incidences of fraud, corruption and malpractice in the sector within seven working days. The committees have also requested the CIDB to give a detailed report on the number of injuries at the construction sites which will allow for proper oversight. The committees have also requested the Minister and the department to ensure that contractor performance ratings are completed. This regulation must enforce client departments to complete these as part of contracts and projects managed. This is to ensure that contractors who do shoddy work can be held accountable.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPRSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE, MS NOLITHA NTOBONGWANA – AND THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION, PUBLIC WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE, MR KENNETH MMOIEMANG.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. Party:
          
            African National Congress 