Parliament, Thursday, 28 May 2020 – The Joint Standing Committee on the Financial Management of Parliament has welcomed a presentation of Parliament’s 4th quarter report, in which Parliament managed to achieve 13 of the 15 performance indicators that were applicable targets in the quarter under review. An amount of R513, 649 million was spent out of the 4th quarter budget of R603, 249 million.
	
	The committee impressed upon the management of Parliament to fill vacant positions in order to address the under spending, and that they should strengthen engagements with the National Treasury for additional funding that will enable parties represented in Parliament to effectively conduct constituency work.
	
	The Co-Chairperson of the committee, Ms Peace Mabe, congratulated Parliament for hosting the first successful hybrid sitting of the National Assembly (NA) on 27 May 2020, wherein 250 members connected through the virtual platform and 47 attended in the NA Chamber in Cape Town.
	
	She further acknowledged the successful hosting of 200 virtual committee meetings, since mid-April. Ms Mabe is of the view that all the virtual meetings are in line with the strategic objective of the 6th Parliament to strengthen oversight and accountability.
	
	The committee encouraged management of Parliament to explore alternative measuring techniques to correctly gauge the size of the population that is aware of the business of Parliament.
	
	Ms Mabe said: “It cannot be correct that our people should only rely on a pay television to follow the business of Parliament. The public broadcaster must also be utilised, because of its accessibility to the majority of South Africans.”
	
	She explained further that other alternative platforms should also be explored, including community radio stations and the print media.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSON OF THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT OF PARLIAMENT, MS PEACE MABE
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal