Parliament, Friday, 15 May 2020 – Three of South Africa’s biggest metropolitan municipalities that are also the epicentres of the coronavirus outbreak yesterday appeared before Parliament’s Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) to share their Covid-19 response plans.
	
	Cape Town, Johannesburg and eThekwini metropolitan municipalities briefed the committee on their plans to combat the spread of Covid-19 virus in their cities, as well as their economic recovery plans.
	
	eThekwini and Johannesburg were represented by their executive mayors, Mr Mxolisi Kaunda and Mr Geoff Makhubo respectively, while Councilor Zahid Badroodien represented the City of Cape Town.
	
	The committee welcomed the three cities’ efforts to provide shelter and food to homeless people, as well as sanitisation of public spaces, such as taxi ranks and bus stations.
	
	Members of the committees also appealed to the metros to ensure aggressive monitoring in densely populated areas where social distancing was difficult. The committee also wants the three cities to ensure that there was transparency and openness in the spending of Covid-19 emergency funds, as the public must know what the money is spent on.
	
	Committee Chairperson Ms Muthambi said the meeting was very necessary for the committee to get an idea of what is happening in the country’s economic hubs. “We are going to follow up on these cities’ response plans to the virus. They are the epicentres of the virus outbreak and we want to ensure their plans to contribute to curbing the spread of the virus do succeed. This is a health crisis as well as an economic crisis,” the Chairperson said.
	
	Johannesburg Mayor Councillor Makhubo warned that extended lockdown may lead to the possibility of an increase in social unrest linked to loss of income, food provision and service delivery.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COGTA, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sakhile Mokoena
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 705 2130
	Email:smokoena@parliament.gov.za The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. Party:
          
            African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga