The Department of Tourism is counting the costs incurred by the sector in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic. Since its outbreak, tourists cancelled their planned visits to South Africa and the revenue lost by the hospitality industry and other tourism-related attractions is mounting. The department was supposed to present its strategic and annual performance plans to the joint meeting of the Portfolio Committee on Tourism, and Select Committee on Trade and Industry, Economic Development, Small Business Development, Tourism and Employment. However, according to the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Tourism, Mr Supra Mahumapelo, the department wrote to the Presiding Officers of Parliament requesting for the withdrawal of its annual performance plan on the grounds that it has been rendered irrelevant by the advent of the pandemic. Mr Mahumapelo highlighted the fact that according to the Public Finance Management Act, the department must present its budget, strategic and annul performance plans in preparation for the tabling of the budget in the National Assembly. The Minister of Tourism, Ms Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane, said: “We could not anticipate the severity of the impact of the pandemic on our annual performance plan. We had to go back to revise it because we realised that what we have committed ourselves to do this year has become obsolete.” She further stated that following their analysis of their annual performance plan, they came to a conclusion to review their annual performance plan. “Not all the departments will be affected as we are. We wrote to the Presiding Officers of Parliament requesting permission to withdraw our annual performance plan and table a revised one at a later stage, because tourism is one of the most affected economic sectors by the pandemic.” She said: “We made this request to ensure that we table what is practical and can be reviewed. We don’t want to table our annual performance plan as a matter of compliance. For instance, we wanted to create an entity within the department to market the country abroad, but that cannot happen now due to this pandemic.” Ms Kubayi-Ngubane told the committees that the department has a draft revised annual performance plan and a budget which it can submit to Parliament in due course. “As a department we beg for the committees’ indulgence to allow us to present what makes sense and what is achievable,” she added. According to Mr Mahumapelo, Mr Cedric Frolick, the House Chairperson responsible for committees in the National Assembly, said there is nothing wrong in the proposal for the withdrawal of the annual performance plan being accepted, as long as the department does that before 2 June this year. Some members of the committees argued that the request of the department should be accepted on the grounds that no one expected the pandemic and its effect on the department’s work. The letter was roundly accepted by the committees as the view that the annual performance plan of the department must speak to what the department will be focusing on – and be implementing in due course, and the deliverables that it can be scrutinised against. The committees agreed in principle and said the Presiding Officers should look for a possible date that will be suitable to everybody to discuss the reviewed annual performance plan and the budget of the department. The Minister promised that the department will comply and they will do whatever within the time frames of the budget process. “We can present our budget next week. We made this request because we take our work very seriously.” “The request will be handled within the rules of Parliament. Now that it looks there’s unanimity on the department’s request, the department can do the review of its annual performance plan and budget and we expect that to be done within the time frames,” said Mr Mahumapelo. He further cautioned the department that when it is reviewing its annual performance plan, it should consider the extent of poverty in the villages and small towns, based on that, the scale of its resources should tilt in favour of places where poverty is rife. Mr Mahumapelo added: “Even during this coronavirus period, the department should address poverty, unemployment and inequality. These affect the youth and women and we are the most unequal society in the world.” By Abel Mputing 11 May 2020 A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. Party:
          
            Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng