The Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations invited the Public Service Commission to outline its input on the current budget and the forthcoming adjusted budget to be table by the National Treasury in response to the unprecedented economic challenges posed by Covid-19. The committee’s process of briefig and consultation is a prelude to the passing of the Appropriation Bill. The Public Service Commission (PSC) plays an important role in the appropriation of the budget because it is responsible for ensuring that there is effective management of public resources. It is also responsible for ensuring that there is value for money in the way in which public administration does its work. In its presentation on the Appropriation Bill, the PSC highlighted procurement as a risk area for wastage and budget leakage. Ms Phumelele Nzimande, the Public Service Commissioner, also alluded to the fact that the adjusted budget has to take into consideration amendments on the basis of a risk-based approach. Nonetheless, any further expenditure cuts would affect performance and service delivery. “Heads cuts in public service is always an obvious target, but also we must not ignore value chain associated with that.” Covid-19 is an opportunity for serious reflection at all levels, Ms Nzimande added, on how to utilise the gains of the fourth industrial revolution (4IR). “Our failure to deliver on it is now apparent. And if we don’t take advantage of it, it will disadvantage the future generation and the efficiency of the public service.” The government was enthusiastic about the opportunities of the 4IR, she continued. However, implementation has been slow and she warned that the government must ensure that “this does not leave behind the very people it intends to serve”. She further mentioned that if 4IR was imbedded in the operational strategies of the public sector, chaos related to the distribution of food parcels would be avoided. “Was the distribution of parcels efficient and effective? Was there a value for money in it how it was conducted? Could this have been done electronically? The inefficiencies in service delivery would be a thing of the past had we embraced the 4IR as part of an operational strategy of the public sector. We would get value for money.” In addition, the cost of doing business in the public sector remains an ongoing concern. “Departments have their own legal advisers,” she noted, “but they still go out to get legal services outside. This needs to be reconsidered. Public service does not derive value for money from such practice.” She also pointed out that the ever-increasing litigation against the government is untenable and poses a serious threat to the public purse. “Ethics and high standard of professionalism are needed to curb underperformance. This is linked to the bigger concept of value for money concept.” She warned that the stimulus package needed an accounting framework that would curb wasteful expenditure and corruption. Asked by members of the committee which government programmes should be discontinued to free funds to respond to challenges posed by the pandemic, Ms Nzimande replied: “The non-payment of bonuses and freezing of wage increment are some of options that need to be explored.” Committee members also asked her about the lack of effective internal controls and the high cost of procurement is untenable. Her response: “Where there is a lack of generic training for staff involved in this area in certain departments training need to be provided. Where there’s an act of incompetency, those responsible for that should be held accountable.” Members also asked for the PSC’s views on virtual interaction between departments and parliamentary committees as a potential cost saving measure. Ms Nzimande responded: “We need agility to make it possible to save resources that should be servicing our people. Virtual meetings should be the way to go in the future to save costs,” she said. The Chairperson of the Committee, Mr Sfiso Buthelezi, noted: “The cardinal impression I have year in and year out is that over-expenditure is indicative of poor project management skills in various departments. Can such courses be offered as areas of demand in the Public Service School?” Ms Buthelezi queried whether this school provided value for money and conceded, “We have to be honest, in public administration as a whole we have fallen short in effective training to ensure that public servants are fit for purpose.” She said there may be good school of governance, “but in each government department there has to be a generic training unit that is responsive to the mandate of that department”. The continued non-payment of small business within three months, as stipulated in the regulations irked members of the committee. “When we don’t pay small business, we are breaking the back of the very notion of economic development of black business in this country,” said Mr Buthelezi. Ms Nzimande conceded that “this constitutes a failure of management. It’s also associated with shameful corruption associated with payments and procurement system in the public sector.” Mr Buthelezi mentioned that late payment has been a persistent problem and has prompted black small business owners to ask him if they will ever get their fair share from the stimulus package. “Many owners of small black businesses say we only hear about the stimulus package as black businesses. We are just spectators.” It is important that the stimulus package is transformative and developmental, Mr Buthelezi urged. He asked the PCS to consider this issue and report back on its suggestions next time it meets with the committee. Abel Mputing
	5 May 2020 The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament. Party:
          
            Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng