Parliament, Wednesday, 20 May 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources has finalised a process of listening and interrogating presentations on the Annual Performance Plans (APPs) and budgets for the 2020/21 financial year of the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy (DMRE), together with its entities, and it will now consider and adopt a committee report with some recommendations, based on what was presented.
	
	Presentations also dealt with the Medium Term Strategic Framework (MTSF) for the period 2020-2024. The DMRE has presented an estimated budget of R9.3 billion for the current financial year, most of which will be transferred to its entities. The entities reporting under the DMRE are the Council for Geoscience (CGS), National Energy Regulator of South Africa (Nersa), Central Energy Fund (CEF), National Nuclear Regulator (NNR), South African Nuclear Energy Corporation (Necsa), National Radio-Active Waste Disposal Institute (NRWDI), Mintek, Mine Health and Safety Council (MHSC), State Diamond Trader (SDT), and the South African Diamond and Precious Metal Regulator (SADPMR)
	
	The CEF and Necsa are holding companies with subsidiaries. The CEF subsidiaries are PetroSA, Strategic Fuel Fund, iGas and African Exploration Mining and Finance Corporation, whereas those of Necsa are NTP, Pelchem, Pelindaba Enterprises and Safari-1.
	
	Minister Gwede Mantashe told the committee on 7 May 2020 that his department is currently working on, among other things, a model to merge and repurpose some of the entities, in order to address their duplicate and competing mandates.
	
	The committee Chairperson, Mr Sahlulele Luzipo, extended a word of appreciation to the department and all its entities for appearing before the committee, and for answering questions. Mr Luzipo went further to say that: “Due to the limited time associated with virtual meetings, some questions required detailed written responses. The department and its entities should then be warned that, during deliberation on a committee report, we might highlight certain aspects of the presentations that might require detailed reports.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MR SAHLULELE LUZIPO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 748
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”. Party:
          
            African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga