Members of the Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation want the National Housing Finance Corporation (NHFC), the Estate Agency Affairs Board (EAAB), and the Community Schemes Ombud Service (CSOS) to expand their reach and make sure that their services are well known by all South Africans. The three entities of the Department of Human Settlements appeared before the committee to present their strategic and annual performance plans for the 2020/21 financial year. On Monday evening, the NHFC, EAAB and CSOS made presentations in a virtual meeting of the committee, and appealed to Members of Parliament to consider their plans. However, Members of Parliament were concerned about the three entities’ reach to the public and whether citizens were even aware of their existence and the service they provide. “I feel these three entities are not known enough to the public and I think all three must up their advocacy campaigns, especially in rural areas and townships, and we also need to know their role in the new district model,” said committee member, Ms Grace Tseke. She was supported by another member of the committee, Ms Nonkosi Mvana, who said: “It is not the first time we say that they must up their game, we said they should introduce themselves because they are not known. In my thinking, they are not known enough by the same community they are supposed to serve.” The EAAB has the responsibility to regulate, maintain and promote the conduct of estate agents, issue Fidelity Fund certificates, prescribe the standard of education and training for estate agents, investigate complaints lodged against estate agents, manage and control the Estate Agents Fidelity Fund. It has an indirect responsibility to contribute to the realisation of the “right to adequate housing” by the state through ensuring that property consumers are protected from unscrupulous estate agents. The NHFC was established in terms of the Companies Act with a mandate to broaden and deepen market access to affordable housing finance for rural, low- and middle-income households in South Africa. And CSOS must provide education, information, documentation and such services as may be required to raise awareness to owners, occupiers, executive committees and other persons or entities who have rights and obligations in community schemes, regarding those rights and obligations. Ms Ndivhuo Rabuli, the Acting Chief Ombud of CSOS, told the committees that her entity has submitted a request for the amendment of the CSOS Act to make it more effective, and also has plans to have more awareness campaigns to make sure that as many South Africans as possible were aware of the services of CSOS. The NHFC management told the committees that in their budget, they have made provisions to inform the public about the entity’s services. The EAAB Board Chairperson, Mr Nkosinathi Biko, said: “We deliberately took a decision that the entity must be audited by the Auditor-General, we want to hold it to superior standards of auditing.” All three entities told Members of Parliament that the plans they were presenting were “pre-Covid-19” plans and committed themselves to return to the committee with updated plans that will factor in the effects of the virus. The Deputy Minister of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation, Ms Pan Tshwete, said her department has learnt some lessons from Covid-19, which will impact on the budget of the entities. “These entities have not factored in the effects of Covid-19 yet, almost all programmes of the entities will be affected, there might be changes in their budgets,” said the Deputy Minister. By Sakhile Mokoena 12 May 2020 The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. Party:
          
            African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga