Parliament, Friday, 29 May 2020 – The Chairperson of the Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution notes that the deadline for the committee to complete its work is the end of May 2020.
	
	The committee last week indicated that it would approach the Speaker of the National Assembly requesting an extension of its mandate, as it has been unable to complete its work. The committee has already visited several provinces for public hearings, but could not finalise its work due to the national lockdown imposed due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
	
	Yesterday, the National Assembly Programme Committee also noted that the Ad Hoc committee’s term is due to expire and said that the National Assembly would need to extend it. The programming committee noted that the lockdown and social distancing protocols associated with the Covid-19 pandemic had affected the Ad Hoc committee’s programme of public hearings.
	
	Committee Chairperson Dr Mathole Motshekga thanked all South Africans today for participating constructively in the process thus far. “We received feedback from a wide variety of people with different viewpoints on this very emotive matter. Our public hearings were well attended and everyone who wanted to speak was allowed the opportunity, in the spirit of a participatory democracy.”
	
	Dr Motshekga said the committee’s work will not be in vain, as it will continue where it left off once it is revived by Parliament.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INITIATE AND INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AMENDING SECTION 25 OF THE CONSTITUTION, DR MATHOLE MOTSHEKGA
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng