Parliament, Friday, 15 May 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Health was briefed by the Auditor-General of South Africa (AGSA) on its analysis and review of the Department of Health’s strategic plan, annual performance plan and budget.
	
	The committee was of the view that the report presented by the office of the AGSA painted a concerning image of the department’s performance. According to the AGSA’s report, the national Department of Health’s performance indicators in key focus areas, such as financial management, information technology (IT) and compliance management require intervention as there has been no improvement.
	
	Briefing the committee, the office of the AGSA said that the IT environment remains a concern, as it has not improved from prior years and the impact is evident in the department’s operations. If matters are not resolved, this could impact on the final audit.
	
	On a point raised by the committee that the AGSA’s findings indicate that the department was not meeting its targets, the AGSA indicated no improvement on the departments performance. The committee is concerned that the report reflects a similar situation in the department and the provinces to last year’s findings.
	
	The committee said that with the country experiencing a pandemic, this will have a direct bearing on the department’s budget and performance, as funds have been directed to fight Covid-19.
	
	The committee asked how Covid-19 will affect the department’s performance going forward, as the budget will be completely reconfigured. In response, the AGSA said it is in talks with the department regarding the R20-billion special budget in order to understand how it will be allocated and transferred to provinces. Furthermore, the AGSA said Covid-19 will have a big impact on the department’s annual performance plans, as these will have to be adjusted in line with new priorities.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, DR SIBONGISENI DHLOMO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote. Party:
          
            African National Congress 