Parliament, Thursday 28 May 2020 – Parliament will continue with its second-leg of the provincial 1994 Women’s Charter review in the Northern Cape Province, tomorrow 29 May 2020.
	
	Parliament’s delegation, led by the Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Ms Sylvia Lucas will hold a joint virtual session with the Frances Baard and John Taolo Gaetsewe District Municipalities at 3PM. This session follows the first round of engagements with the ZF Mngcawu district stakeholders on Tuesday.
	
	The provincial 1994 Women’s Charter review is aimed to take stock of progress made in implementing the articles of the 1994 Women’s Charter for Effective Equality and assess its impact since the advent of freedom and democracy.
	
	The intensive consultation process will culminate in the adoption of improved policy and legislative oversight mechanisms, and interventions aimed to remove all structural, institutional and cultural barriers to the realisation of gender equality in South Africa.
	
	Parliament will continue with these virtual consultative sessions in the Northern Cape Province to ensure that all five districts are consulted.
	
	Details of the events are as follows: Members of the media who wish to interview the Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Ms Sylvia Lucas can contact Ms Nolizwi Magwagwa on 081 7165824. Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may get involved and follow the meeting live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408) and via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. Democratic Alliance on the National List