Parliament, Tuesday, 12 May 2020 – The Select Committee on Appropriations will tomorrow hold a virtual to receive a briefing from the South African Local Government Association (Salga) on the 2020 Division of Revenue Bill.
	
	On Wednesday, 15 April 2020, the committee reiterated its call for public comments in the form of written submissions on the Bill. The committee will thus tomorrow also consider the submissions and comments received.
	
	The 2020 Division of Revenue Bill was tabled together with the 2020/2021 Budget by the Minister of Finance on 26 February 2020 in the National Assembly.
	
	The Bill provides for the equitable division of revenue, raised nationally, among the national, provincial and local spheres of government for the relevant financial year; the responsibilities of all three spheres pursuant to such division; and provides for matters connected therewith.
	
	Details of the meeting:
	Date: Wednesday, 13 May 2020
	Time: 09:00 am
	
	Members of the media who would like to be part of the meeting to observe may forward their contact details to Mr Mlindi Mpindi on +27817167329 for inclusion in the Parliament Communications Service Whatsapp group, where login details will be shared.
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS, MS DIKELEDI MAHLANGU.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. Party:
          
            African National Congress 