Parliament, Monday 18 May 2020 - The National Assembly Rules Committee will meet tomorrow, Tuesday 19 May, to consider which practices under its rules on “Unforeseen Eventualities” can be put in place to enable virtual meetings.
	
	In terms of the National Assembly Rules on “Unforeseen Eventualities” {Rule 6 (1)} the “Speaker may give a ruling or frame a rule in respect of any eventuality for which these rules or orders of the House do not provide.” In doing so the Speaker must give “due regard to the procedures, precedents, practices and conventions developed by the House and on the basis of constitutional values and principles underpinning an open, accountable and democratic society.”
	
	Rule 6 (2) further says that a “rule framed by the Speaker remains in force until the House, based on a recommendation of the Rules Committee, has decided thereon.”
	During tomorrow’s meeting the Committee will also consider the reconfiguration of the clustered system of government portfolios for Questions to Ministers.
	
	Details of the Committee meetings are as follows:
	Date: Tuesday, 19 May 2020
	Time: 10:00 to 11:30
	Venue: Virtual Meeting Platform
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. Party:
          
            African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape