Parliament, Wednesday, 27 May 2020 – The Select Committee on Appropriations, having considered the Division of Revenue Bill [B3 – 2020] and the mandates from provincial legislatures, has today adopted its report.
	
	In processing the Bill, the committee has over the past few weeks received various briefings from stakeholders such as the Financial and Fiscal Commission (FFC), the Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu) and the South African Local Government Associations (Salga). The committee also received a number of comments from the public following its call for input on the Bill.
	
	The committee deliberated on the inclusion of submissions from the public. A number of these submissions do not speak to the content of the Bill, and while these submissions will be mentioned in the report, the committee recognises the need for Parliament, provincial legislatures and municipal councils to further educate the general public about the significance of such legislation, as well as other critical fiscal legislations.
	
	The committee resolved to include in its report a recommendation that the Minister of Finance should ensure that additional allocations for drought relief for all provinces are considered during the 2020 adjustment budget, in light of the fact that the Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs declared South Africa “a drought disaster area” on 26 February 2020.
	
	The report will be tabled in the National Council of Provinces on Tuesday, 2 June 2020.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS, MS DIKELEDI MAHLANGU.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. Economic Freedom Fighters