Parliament, Monday 18 May 2020 - The Rules Committees of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces will meet tomorrow, Tuesday 19 May, to consider the programme of the two Houses of Parliament.
	
	The National Assembly will consider which practices under its rules on “Unforeseen Eventualities” can be put in place to enable virtual meetings while the National Council of Provinces will convene to its Programming Committee to plan its business.
	
	In terms of the National Assembly Rules on “Unforeseen Eventualities” {Rule 6 (1)}, the “Speaker may give a ruling or frame a rule in respect of any eventuality for which these rules or orders of the House do not provide.” In doing so the Speaker must give “due regard to the procedures, precedents, practices and conventions developed by the House and based on constitutional values and principles underpinning an open, accountable and democratic society.”
	
	Rule 6 (2) further says that a “rule framed by the Speaker remains in force until the House, based on a recommendation of the Rules Committee, has decided thereon.”
	
	During tomorrow’s meeting, the Committee will also consider the reconfiguration of the clustered system of government portfolios for Questions to Ministers.
	
	Details of the Rules Committee meeting are as follows:
	Date: Tuesday, 19 May 2020
	Time: 10:00 to 11:30
	Venue: Virtual Meeting Platform
	
	The Programming Committee of the NCOP will consider committee report, virtual plenaries of the House, Bills before the House and the upcoming programme of the National Council of Provinces
	
	Details of the virtual meeting:
	Date: 19 May 2020
	Time: 09:00 am
	The meeting will take place via an online video platform
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICAEnquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. Party:
          
            Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of North West