Parliament, Tuesday, 19 May 2020 – The Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Water and Sanitation and Human Settlements, yesterday directed the Department of Cooperative Governance to speed up the processing and finalisation of the Intergovernmental, Monitoring, Support and Intervention Bill, which is intended to support dysfunctional municipalities and avert the application of Section 139 of the Constitution.
	
	“The clear evidence at our disposal points to the fact that the invocation of Section 139 has not always achieved its intended outcomes, which is to ensure viability of municipalities. As a committee, we have also highlighted that Section 139 interventions should be the action of last resort and we are hopeful that this legislation will be instrumental in offering necessary support to struggling municipalities,” said Mr China Dodovu, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	The finalisation and implementation of the Bill, as well as full implementation of the recently adopted district model will be critical in the achievement of performance targets and the delivery of services within the Medium Term Strategic Framework (MTSF) period. “South Africa must move beyond having good policy statements and towards effective implementation of those policies. Service delivery is important going forward,” Mr Dodovu said.
	
	The committee also called for intensive focus on reversing the worrying trend of negative audit opinions the department has received in the recent past. The committee highlighted that the Department of Cooperative Governance must be a leader and inspire confidence in performance achievement and audit outcomes if it is to achieve its mandate of monitoring and assisting local government level.
	
	“We unfortunately don’t get a sense that the department recognises the worrying trend and the impact of the negative audit opinions that the department has had especially in the achievement of the Department’s mandate. This must receive focus as well,” Mr Dodovu emphasised.
	
	The committee has also highlighted the need for the department and the Municipal Infrastructure Support Agency (Misa) to heighten its support and monitoring of the spending of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) as a driver for economic growth, job creation and the overall positive socio-economic impact intended. Critical in this ambition is the need to capacitate municipalities with the skills necessary to deliver on socio-economic-driven programmes. The ultimate goal this MTSF period will be ensure that MIG is spend for its intended objectives.
	
	The committee welcomes Misa’s intention to facilitate the process by which municipalities access alternative sources of funding, including funding instruments for climate change mitigation through a Private Sector Participation (PSP) Model for mobilising additional funding for municipal infrastructure through partnerships with institutions such as the Development Bank of Southern Africa and the Association for Savings and Investments South Africa.
	
	The committee has committed to monitoring the department’s plans and will engage national, provinces and municipalities to ensure that the local sphere of government is functional. “We have to get municipalities right if we are to achieve the goal of effectively changing the lives of the people of South Africa and winning the fight against poverty, inequality and unemployment,” Mr Dodovu emphasised.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, WATER, SANITATION AND HUMAN SETTLEMENTS, MR CHINA DODOVU.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. Party:
          
            African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of North West