Parliament, Friday, 5 May 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs today received a presentation from South African Local Government Association (SALGA) on the Municipal Systems Amendment Bill B2-2019. The committee expressed its disappointment with the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for not being in attendance today and not submitting their input on this bill. This reflects as disrespect for the portfolio committee. The department’s culture of non-compliance has not gone unnoticed, since the department was informed on 28 May 2020 that the committee will be dealing with this bill paragraph by paragraph. The Municipal Systems Amendment Bill B2-2019 seeks to address the issue of municipal managers and senior managers who also hold positions in political parties. The Bill proposes in Section 56A (1) that “a municipal manager or manager directly accountable to a municipal manager may not hold political office in a political party, whether in a permanent, temporary or acting capacity”. The committee welcomed the proposed amendment by SALGA to amend the bill to reflect that no employee may hold political office in a political party, whether in a permanent, temporary or acting capacity. The Chairperson of CoGTA, Ms Faith Muthambi said that the issue of political officer bearers who serve as municipal officials often distort their roles to the benefit of their parties. This together with cadre deployment has to stop in order for municipalities to be capacitated with suitably qualified, skilled and experienced officials. This is necessary for municipalities to effectively carry out its mandate of providing essential services such as water, electricity, infrastructure etc as local government is the core of government providing services for people at grass roots level. The committee engaged with Deputy Minister Parks Tau with regard to the departments’ continuous failure to respond to Parliament’s timelines such as the recent failure to submit documentary evidence by 2 June 2020. The Chairperson informed the Deputy Minister that the committee has already missed the constitutional deadline for this Bill because of the lackadaisical attitude of the department.  After the deadline passed the amendment of the Systems Act reverted to the status quo before its introduction before 2011, where serious leadership, governance and accountability challenges were experienced. Going forward, the committee will reconvene with the department to continue with the process of engaging with the Bill, as non-compliance on the part of the department has serious repercussions for Parliament. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COGTA, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	 E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape