Parliament, Wednesday, 20 May 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, Adv Bongani Bongo, has informed the committee that a preliminary report from the Public Service Commission (PSC) on its investigation into allegations of wrongdoing at the Government Printing Works will be given to the committee in the next week and will be presented to the committee following that. This will enable the committee to discuss and make recommendations on the complete report.
	
	“As per the 8th May meeting agreement, the matter will be considered as soon as a report is available. As the committee, we have engaged the legal division in Parliament to gather more information from the whistle-blower to substantiate the allegations. Also, the Minister has instituted an investigation through the PSC. Once these reports are incorporated, a comprehensive report will be tabled before the committee,” Adv Bongo said.
	
	Meanwhile, the committee welcome the progress in clearing the backlog in the registration of births that arose as a result of level 5 lockdown. The department reported that during level 4 lockdown, the department has registered 46 541 of the 81 650 births comprising the backlog (57%). “We appreciate the amount of work that has gone into clearing the backlog and are even more appreciative that the department plans to clear the remaining backlog within the next week. This will enable the families, especially the poor, to access government-announced social safety net initiatives,” Adv Bongo said.
	
	Despite this, the committee raised concerns about the slow rate of collection of smart identity document (ID) cards at Home Affairs offices. The department reported that only 29 475 ID cards were collected of the 412 686 cards in home affairs offices currently. This represents a mere 7% collection rate since level 4 of the lockdown was implemented. “This unfortunately means that people are unable to access many social relief measures by government. The department must intensify its communication drive to encourage collection,” Adv Bongo emphasised.
	
	The committee agreed to the department’s plans to allow additional services when level 3 is implemented. The committee is in agreement that the additional services will be by appointment. The committee has instructed the department to ensure that social distancing and health protocols are maintained, especially in anticipation of the increased in numbers seeking the department’s services.
	
	The committee welcomes the progress in implementing a policy decision to move refugee processing centres (RPC) to ports of entry. This decision is intended to speed up asylum application processing times, while separating economic migrants from genuine refugees. The committee has noted the establishment and operation of the Musina RPC. Furthermore, the committee notes the funding challenges for the establishment for the Lebombo RPC and encouraged the department to engage sister departments and all spheres of government regarding access to land to establish these centres.
	
	Meanwhile, the committee welcomes the progress report on the establishment of a one-stop border post through a public/private partnership process. The committee acknowledges the steps taken by the department to seek approval from National Treasury, as per treasury regulations. The committee has called for the conclusion of the consultative process with neighbouring countries to build consensus on project outcomes and designs.
	
	Furthermore, the committee has called for more speed in identifying and considering an appropriate legal framework through which commercial users will be charged and invoiced, and for revenue collection.
	
	Meanwhile, the committee has called for the speedy roll-out of the Border Management Agency (BMA), once the Bill is signed into law. The implementation of the BMA and the roll-out of one-stop border post programme are seen as joint pillars necessary to ensure the smooth functioning of the border area.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, ADVOCATE BONGANI BONGO
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. Party:
          
            Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga