Parliament, Thursday, 14 May 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Police, and the Select Committee on Security and Justice have expressed concerns regarding the funding constraints they said will ultimately weaken the ability of the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (IPID) to deliver on its mandate.
	
	The committees received a briefing yesterday from the IPID, and the Civilian Secretariat for Police on their annual performance plans for 2020/21 and strategic plans 2020/25.
	
	The concerns raised by the committees were in the context of the critical role that the IPID plays as the watchdog of the South African Police Service (Saps). “We are of the view that the problems of incapacity of the IPID due to budget constraints are concerning, considering that they impact on areas such as contract management, service delivery and coverage, and accessibility as well as on compliance to accounting and reporting responsibilities,” said Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson, the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police.
	
	Both committees emphasised their full support for the work of the IPID, and are also calling for the provision of adequate funding to the entity to ensure that it is in a better position to perform its functions effectively. Furthermore, the committees said, the expansion of the IPID footprint is critical as it will promote policing that is within the ambit of the rule of law and respects human rights.
	
	The intention of the IPID to increase indicators in line with its core mandate in spite of budgetary constraints is welcomed and if that, according to the committees can be achieved, it will improve the integrity of the Saps. The committees urged IPID to always keep a perfect balance between quality and quantity in their work.
	
	When considering the budget of the Civilian Secretariat for Police, both committees emphasised the need to improve the relationship between the police and the communities on a continuous basis to ensure the existence of a strong and strategic platform for the purposes of collaboration in the fight against crime.
	
	“While we appreciate plans by the Civil Secretariat for Police to agree and sign Memorandums of Understanding with the Department of Cooperative Governance as well as the South African Local Government Association, we urge you that this be given priority to standardise and streamline the working relationship,” said Ms Shahidabibi Shaikh, the Chairperson of the Select Committee.
	
	Both committees emphasised the centrality of the Community Policing Forums (CPF) in the fight against crime and, based on that, policy on the establishment of, and the alignment of the work between SAPS and CPF must be top priority for the Secretariat.
	
	The committees also resolved that CPFs should be asked to serve as essential workers, and the Civilian Secretariat will take this to the next Nat Joints meeting.
	
	Furthermore, the committees urged the Secretariat to ensure that constructive and harmonious engagement within the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security Cluster prevails to ensure the finalisation and implimentation of the Integrated Crime and Violence Prevention Strategy.
	
	The use of technology as a force multiplier has long been a critical issue and was highlighted in the 5th Parliament’s legacy report. The committees welcome the announcement that the Civilian Secretariat for Police will focus on facilitating the creation of a smart or e-policing environment.
	
	Due to time constraints, the committees could not conclude their interaction with the IPID and resolved to arrange another meeting to conclude the interaction.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSONS OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MS TINA JOEMAT-PETTERSSON AND CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND JUSTICE MS SHAHIDABIBI SHAIKH
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the Committees’ Media Officer:
	
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. Party:
          
            Freedom Front Plus on the provincial list for the province of Free State