Parliament, Wednesday, 6 May 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration today received briefings from the Public Service Commission and the National School of Government on their 2019/2024 strategic and annual performance plans for the 2020/2021 financial year.
	
	The committee noted that, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, it is necessary for the Public Service Commission and National School of Government to amend its annual performance and strategic plans and place emphasis on key priority areas.
	
	The Public Service Commission reported that, although the commission was not listed as an essential service provider according to the lockdown regulations, however, the Public Service Commission Corruption Hotline remains as an essential service, and its operation needs to continue. It also reported about the four vacant positions of commissioners that exist, and that must be filled, three at provincial level and one at national level.
	
	The committee expressed its concern over the sustainability of the National School of Government as contact classes had to be suspended due to lockdown as a result of COVID -19. The committee heard that the school generates 80% of its income from the intake of students who register for various programmes that are offered by the school.
	
	Currently the school is experiencing a loss of R10.5 million per month. The committee was pleased to hear that the school has a long-term strategy for sustainability which includes e-learning, a change in price modalities and an extension of its courses to other markets such as Parliament and the state-owned enterprises.
	
	The committee wanted progress on the Public Service Commission Amendment Bill which is designed to convert the commission into an autonomous body. It was pleased to hear that the commission will present the Bill to the Minister of Public Service and Administration soon.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION, MR TYOTYO JAMES.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. Party:
          
            African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo