Parliament, Thursday, 28 May 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Communications has extended heartfelt condolences to the family, friends and colleagues of the late Ms Masindi Mkhize. Ms Mkhize was the founder and publisher of the IsiZulu community newspaper Ezakwazulu, as well as a board member of the Association of Independent Publishers (AIP).
	
	The newspaper is published bi-monthly and is the only one of its kind to be distributed in the Kwadedangendlane and Outer West communities in Kwazulu-Natal since 2010.
	
	The committee has come to learn about Ms Mkhize’s passing at the time when it is in the process of interviewing, through its sub-committee, 20 candidates to fill four vacancies at the Media Development and Diversity Agency (MDDA) Board.
	
	The MDDA is a Schedule 3A public entity, in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, and it was established in terms of the MDDA Act of 2002. It has a mandate to, amongst other things, promote media development and diversity by providing support to community and small commercial media projects. It is also charged with encouraging ownership and control of access to media by historically disadvantaged communities as well as by historically diminished indigenous language and cultural groups.
	
	It is against this backdrop that the committee felt that Ms Mkhize’s passing has left the community media fraternity poorer. The committee believes that she still had a lot more to offer in the community media and publishing space in light of her 25 years of experience in the sector.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Boyce Maneli, said: “Ms Mkhize has left an indelible mark in the sector and country at large through her momentous work. May her soul rest in peace.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE COMMUNICATIONS, MR BOYCE MANELI
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committees’ Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year. National Freedom Party