Parliament, Sunday 17 May 2020 – Parliament’s business will continue this week with Committees of the National Assembly (NA) and the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) receiving briefings from various government departments regarding their strategic plans, annual performance plans and budget allocations. Matters of the oversight of the COVID-19 pandemic will also receive attention in some committees.
	
	The National Assembly Rules Committee is scheduled to meet on Tuesday, 19 May. The meeting will consider the Rule on Virtual meetings in terms of National Assembly Rule 6 (unforeseen eventualities) and the reconfiguration of the clustered system of government portfolios for Questions to Ministers.
	
	The National Assembly is scheduled to hold its first hybrid sitting (both physical and virtual setting) on 27 May for questions to ministers, particularly those heading departments that are central to government's response to the Covid-19 pandemic. The NCOP will hold its first virtual sitting on 2 June to consider the Division of Revenue Bill, which was approved by the National Assembly in March.
	
	At least 47 meetings of the Committees of the two Houses – The National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces - are scheduled to hold virtual oversight meetings this week. Parliament has already conducted over 100 virtual meetings of oversight committees. Meetings have thus far been held all days of the week, including weekends and public holidays, due to a huge load of oversight and legislative work before Parliament.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on emailmmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	Details of the Committee meetings are as follows:
	
	Monday, 18 May:
	Portfolio Committee on Communications: Adoption of the Budget Vote Report of the Department of Communications and Digital Technologies and the briefing on the reconfiguration of the department;
	
	Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Water and Sanitation and Human Settlements: Briefing by the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs on 2020/2021 Annual Performance Plan and budget allocation to departmental programmes and sub-programmes], Virtual Meeting Platform, 18:00-21:00.
	
	PC on Trade and Industry: Joint briefing with the Select Committee - update on COVID-19 measures as it pertains to DTIC’s mandate;
	
	Tuesday, 19 May:
	Joint meeting of the PC on Basic Education and SC on Education and Technology, Sports, Arts and Culture: Briefings on Budget Vote 16: Basic Education (2020/21);
	
	Joint meeting of the Standing Committee on Finance and Select Committee on Finance: Processing Disaster Management Bills;
	
	PC on Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation: Briefing by Water Boards on the 2018/19 Annual Report and Financial Statements: 4 water boards: Sedibeng, Lepelle Northern, Mhlathuze and Amatola;
	
	Wednesday, 20 May:
	SC on Appropriations: Consideration of Negotiating Mandates on the Division of Revenue Bill [B3 — 2020]];
	
	Standing Committee on Appropriations: Briefing by National Treasury and the Land Bank on the financial issues affecting the entity;
	
	PC on Public Works and Infrastructure: To receive briefings by Construction Industry Development Board (CIDB) and Council for the Built Environment (CBE);
	
	Thursday, 21 May:
	PC on Social Development: Briefing by the department on the progress report on meeting the North Gauteng High Court deadline on foster care orders backlog;
	
	Joint Standing Committee on Financial Management of Parliament: Consideration and adoption of the Committee’s report on the Sixth Parliament’s draft Strategic Plan; Consideration and adoption of the Committee’s report on Parliament’s performance in the third quarter of 2019/20;
	
	Friday, 22 May:
	PC on Defence and Military Veterans: Briefing by the Research on the Integration process within the SANDF;
	
	PC on Justice and Correctional Services: Briefing by the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development on its Strategic Plan, APP and Budget 2020/21
	
	For a full list of the Committees, visit Parliament’s website www.parliament.gov.za
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. Party:
          
            African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape