Parliament, Wednesday, 13 May 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources was briefed by the Council for Geoscience (CGS) and the Central Energy Fund (CEF) on their Annual Performance Plans (APPs) for the 2020/21 financial year, as well as the Medium Term Strategic Framework (MTSF) for the period 2020-2024.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Sahlulele Luzipo, welcomed measures put in place by the CGS to prevent the spread of the coronavirus in the workplace, considering that the entity is permitted, in terms of level 4 regulations of the national lockdown, to intensify monitoring and conduct impact assessment of seismicity. Mr Luzipo is pleased that pre-screening is conducted regularly and personal protective equipment is provided to those members of staff who reported back to work on 4 May 2020.
	
	The CGS presented five strategic objectives for the current MTSF and aims to focus on the exploration of renewable energy minerals, base metals, fluorspar deposits, phosphates and precious metals. Mr Luzipo believe that the move is commendable, and that it will help attract investment in the mining sector.
	
	The CEF Group presentation also covered, among other things, key strategic themes, PetroSA turnaround plan, and the score card. The CEF Group is a holding company with four main subsidiaries, including PetroSA, iGas, Strategic Fuel Fund (SFF) and African Exploration Mining and Finance Corporation. Mr Luzipo commended the board for the permanent appointments of chief executive officers at the CEF Group, PetroSA and the SFF.
	
	Mr Sahlulele Luzipo was encouraged by the CEF Group board chairperson, who despite his company being counted amongst those in need of a government bailout, reassured the committee that the CEF Group is not in the business of bailout. The chairperson of the board told the committee that his company has started, gradually, to forge partnerships with the private sector to raise funds.
	
	The committee was previously briefed by the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy on its APP and the MTSF, and after listening to presentations from all the department’s entities, it will then deliberate and adopt a report.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MR SAHLULELE LUZIPO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 748
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year. Party:
          
            African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of North West