The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Communications, Mr Boyce Maneli, has urged the Ministry in the Department of Communications and Digital Technologies to move with speed to fill vacant board positions at the South African Post Office (Sapo), to restore governance stability. The company is currently without a permanent group chief executive officer (GCEO), and it has placed on suspension, with full pay, two group executive managers, pending an investigation into allegations of misconduct against them. Adv Ivumile Nongogo is currently acting in two executive management positions, namely GCEO and group executive: governance and regulatory. This came to light when members of the committee were briefed by the post office on its annual performance plan (APP) and budget for the year 2020/21. The chairperson of the board, Ms Colleen Makhubela, highlighted challenges arising from resignations at board level. Ms Makhubela reminded the committee about existing tensions between Sapo and the Post Bank, saying these added to current challenges at the post office. Mr Maneli expressed appreciation for the work done by the post office under the circumstances, and called on the Ministry in the Department of Communications and Digital Technologies to help restore governance stability and find solutions to the problems between the post office and Post Bank. “We will await a briefing by the Ministry on measures taken to resolve the current challenges,” he said. The committee noted with concern Sapo’s projected revenue loss of R1.9 billion by the end of this financial year. Notwithstanding the fact that the post office has been haemorrhaging revenue in recent financial years, the bulk of the loss, this time around, is attributed to the impact of Covid-19. The board chairperson, Ms Makhulela, also spoke of the two biggest items in Sapo’s budget, namely the upgrade of the digital network and the security upgrade. These two items will place a burden on the budget, considering that the bulk of revue at the post office is generated through mail service, a service that has been declining over the years. Members of the committee encouraged Sapo to invest in upskilling and reskilling of the workforce in order to prepare them for the planned shift to e-commerce. Ms Makhubela agreed with the committee on this, saying: “The post office has completed a skills audit, which has highlighted a deficit in technology-related skills.” Members also advised Sapo to consider working closely with registered spaza shops, in order to retain its national footprint and the resulting competitive advantage. Additionally, members of the committee were briefed by the Government Communication and Information System (GCIS) on its annual performance plan and budget for the 2020/21 financial year. They commended the good work in communicating the government messages on Covid-19. Mr Maneli said: “We are aware of the budget constraints facing the GCIS, but your work speaks volume. We appreciate that you are engaging with the National Treasury with a view of resolving this [budget] matter.” Members further appreciated GCIS’s commitment of clean governance, even in the middle of a national disaster. The GCIS will prioritise messages about Covid-19, gender-based violence and government service delivery in the current financial year. It also aims to establish an integrated communication system with district municipalities. The committee will continue to listen to presentations and annual performance plans from other entities of the Department of Communications and Digital Technologies, and later on deliberate and adopt a report with a clear way forward. Justice Molafo
	15 May 2020 The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. Party:
          
            Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga