Parliament, Wednesday, 21 October 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation received an update on the responses of the Department of International Relations and Cooperation to the committee’s recommendations on the fourth quarter. The committee appreciated the department’s progress with implementing the committee’s oversight interventions.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Tandi Mahambehlala, said: “We had asked for a full report as to why the department defaults to pay service providers within the 30-day rule. How do they not pay for the services they have benefitted from? We find this practice unacceptable, as it impacts on the cash flow of the small- to medium-sized businesses. With the economic situation being what it is now with the pandemic, we cannot watch the department impoverish the many households that depended on the money due.”
	
	The committee commended the department for devising a roadmap for the Foreign Service Act, which comes into force in April 2021. From that date, many aspects of South Africa’s foreign policy, including the coordination of international relations activities of provinces and municipalities, will be rolled out.
	
	There was a general concern among committee members about the effectiveness and visibility of the public diplomacy portfolio. The committee felt that the department was
	
	being poorly represented in the media, with public diplomacy operating in a reactive mode, rather than proactively safeguarding the county’s image.
	
	With regard to allegations contained in a letter written to the Zondo Commission by some departmental staff members, Ms Mahambehlala was dismayed by their total disregard for the Constitution and the President’s prerogative to appoint ambassadors. She said: “It is very disappointing that they use flawed arguments that the President has no exclusive prerogative to deploy heads of mission.” Furthermore: “They believe that as career diplomats, only they should be commissioned to serve abroad at that level. What an error in judgement this turns out to be.”
	
	The committee concluded its agenda with strong views on media allegations linking the partner of the acting ambassador of South Africa in Sudan to an assassination and murder plot. The committee emphasised the need for regular updates on investigations into the matter.
	
	The committee further urged the department to fully collaborate with the government of Sudan to investigate the matter. “The committee will not accept reports saying the investigation is in progress, or investigations are ongoing on such a serious matter that impacts on the image of the country,” emphasised Ms Mahambehlala.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND COOPERATION, MS TANDI MAHAMBEHLALA.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sakhile Mokoena (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 705 2130
	Email: smokoena@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape