Parliament, Thursday, 22 October 2020 – A delegation of the Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution today held its first public hearings on the amendments that will allow for the expropriation of land without compensation in Limpopo since the national lockdown was announced in March this year.
	
	The leader of the delegation, Adv Bongani Bongo, said the public hearings are a continuation of the work done by the committee earlier in the year when it visited six provinces. The hearings are being held from today in Limpopo and Northern Cape, with the committee moving to the Western Cape next week to wrap up its public hearings in all provinces.
	
	Adv Bongo said: “The mandate of the committee is to look into how the Constitution can be amended, to explicate (explain) what is implicate (implied).”
	
	Complying with the lockdown level 1 regulations, the Makwarela Community Hall in Vhembe was as full as the regulations allowed, with some members of the public queuing outside and practising social distancing. At the start of the public hearings, Adv Bongo made a plea to participants to be considerate to all views that would be expressed even if they did not agree with those views.
	
	The majority of the participants indicated that they support the expropriation of land without compensation as it will address the injustices of the past. It will furthermore restore the dignity of the people. Some recommended that there should be a process where there is a just and equitable compensation in line with the law of general application.
	
	A tiny minority was against the amendment, arguing that it will not be beneficial to the country’s economy and that corruption will surface in the process.
	
	The hall was full with a mixture of people from all races, ages, religions, and cultures, who made meaningful contributions in their oral submissions during the public hearings.
	
	Adv Bongo said submissions would be taken into account when the committee deliberates on this matter in Parliament.
	
	The public hearings continue tomorrow in Limpopo.
	Details of the public hearings are as follows:
	Date: 23 October 2020
	Time: 11:00
	Venue: Thomo Community Hall, Greater Giyani
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE LIMPOPO LEADER OF THE DELEGATION OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INITIATE AND INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AMENDING SECTION 25 OF THE CONSTITUTION, ADV BONGANI BONGO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape