Parliament, Friday, 16 October 2020 – The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) welcomes the order given today by the Special Tribunal on the matter between the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) and Caledon River Properties (trading as Magwa Construction, Profteam cc and four others), the service provider which erected the Beitbridge Border Fence.
	
	Scopa is aware that the SIU had sought to freeze the accounts of the service provider while hearing the merits of the case at the Special Tribunal. However, the SIU and the service provider have agreed that the matter required urgent hearing of the merit in order to finalise it.
	
	This order is in line with what Scopa has been calling for on this matter. Scopa has been calling for an investigation into the allegations of corruption in the awarding of the tender and also to make sure that the government has received value for money. This order will give the parties involved time to investigate the merits of the case while ensuring that no further payments are made by the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure while the investigation is ongoing.
	
	Scopa notes the current arrangement between the SIU and Caledon River Properties and will await the final outcome of the hearing. Furthermore, the committee will ensure that consequence management is applied to those responsible for any wrong doing.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SCOPA, MR MKHULEKO HLENGWA.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga