Parliament, Tuesday, 13 October 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development today continued with clause-by-clause deliberations on the Upgrading of the Land Tenure Rights Amendment (Ultra) Bill taking into consideration public comments made on the Bill.
	
	Since the publication of the Bill, the committee has considered written and oral submissions, and has received responses from the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development. In its last meeting on the Bill, the committee adopted a motion of desirability, noting that the amendments before its attention had been determined through a Constitutional Court order.
	
	In essence, the question of desirability of the Bill has been determined by the court order, which compels Parliament to remedy the defects in the principal Act. Therefore, the amendments necessitated by the court order in both the Rahube and Senqu matters were nonnegotiable. Hence the committee’s decision to focus on what the Constitutional Court order instructs Parliament to do.
	
	As a result, clause 4 of the Bill insofar as it relates to Sections 3, 19 and 20 of the principal Act is excluded from the Bill. The reasons for exclusion can be summarised as follows: It is important to note that the committee is extremely concerned about a piecemeal approach to developing comprehensive legislation that will ensure Parliament honours its obligation as required in terms of Section 25(6) and (9) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa.
	
	Section 25(6) provides that: “A person or community whose tenure of land is legally insecure as a result of past racially discriminatory laws or practices is entitled, to the extent provided by an Act of Parliament, either to tenure which is legally secure or comparable redress”
	
	Section 25(9) provides that: “Parliament must enact the legislation referred to in subsection (6)”
	
	As discussed during the previous meetings, most of the substantive comments from stakeholders and members of the public brought to the attention of the committee that the Interim Protection of Informal Land Rights Act (IPILRA) was an interim measure with some limitations, although useful to ensure some measure of constitutional protections of the informal land rights of citizens. The committee unanimously agree that legislation required in Section 25(6) is long overdue, and must be a priority for the committee during the remaining term of the financial year. In its next meeting, the committee will consider the A-List Bill (committee amendments) before reading the B-version of the Bill clause by clause.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, LAND REFORM AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT, NKOSI ZWELIVELILE MANDELA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. African National Congress