Parliament, Friday, 23 October 2020 – As the public hearings on the three gender-based-violence (GBV) Bills are closer to the end, the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services which is conducting them, is also closer to considering all the written and oral submissions it has received on the Bills.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Bulelani Magwanishe, has assured all the organisations and individuals who made oral submissions during the week that the committee attaches equal value and weight to all the submissions, and that each submission (written or oral) will receive serious and adequate consideration of the committee. “No submission will be taken for granted,” stressed Mr Magwanishe.
	
	In as much as the committee wants to meet the urgency with which it must finish the process of the delivery of the GBV legislation, it wants to ensure that it delivers Bills that will pass the test of the legislative framework and the Constitution of the Republic. Furthermore, the committee wants to ensure that all the relevant government departments are ready to implement the Bills.
	
	The committee is going to invite the departments of social development, basic and higher education, and justice and correctional services to establish their state of readiness to implement the legislation. “We need to be certain about their state of readiness as it will be futile to deliver good legislation which is not implementable,” said Mr Magwanishe.
	
	The committee has agreed to invite the remaining two organisations from the list of organisations and individuals who indicated an interest to make oral submissions next week on Wednesday, 28 October at 10:00 in the morning.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, MR BULELANI MAGWANISHE.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 503 1840
	Email: mlukani@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape