Parliament, Friday, 30 October 2020 – The Eastern Cape delegation to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) is assured that the threat of day zero is allayed in the Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan Municipality, and has expressed its happiness with the great strides that have been taken to avert the threat of a water crisis in the metro.
	
	The delegation, which is accompanied by Members of the Eastern Cape Legislature, has been in the province on a week-long NCOP’s Provincial Week Programme. In wrapping up the programme yesterday, the delegation visited Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality based water and sanitation projects to assess their implementation.
	
	The projects that were visited were: Coegakop Water Treatment Works, Walmer Heights Connector Sewer/Driefsands Sewer Project, and Kwa-Nobuhle Water Treatment Works which is being completed. The delegation was happy with the presentations it received from the project implementers, especially the fact that they will meet their implementation time frames.
	
	The delegation heard that the intervention will yield 85 mega litres of water per day something which translates into 30 percent of the current water supply. According to the Project Manager, the borehole is linked to Springs borehole that has historical milestone since its inception.
	
	The delegation highlighted and reiterated the importance of the maintenance plans and budget for the new water and sanitation infrastructure. It told the Acting Executive of the Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan Municipality that the municipality must always ensure that implementable maintenance plans and budget are always in place as part of the security of the infrastructure.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE PROVINCIAL WHIP OF THE DELEGATION, MS NOKUZOLA NDONGENI.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 503 1840
	Email: mlukani@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo