Parliament, Sunday, 11 October 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA) will from tomorrow, 12 October 2020, undertake a week-long visit to Gauteng to assess the state of municipalities in the province and the provision of services to the people. The municipalities under spotlight are the Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality, Emfuleni Local Municipality and Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Municipality.
	
	The ultimate aim is to ensure that municipalities achieve their objectives as set out in section 152 of the Constitution. “As public representatives we are enjoined by the Constitution to hold the executive accountable to ensure that taxpayers’ monies are spent accordingly for the benefit of the people. This oversight has as its central pillar the need to ensure that our people receive quality service delivery from their municipalities,” said Ms Faith Muthambi, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	Tomorrow, the committee will meet the MEC for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, together with the MEC for Treasury in the province to get an overview on the state of municipalities in the province currently.
	
	As part of its oversight programme, the committee will interact with stakeholders such as traditional leaders, ward councillors, rate payers’ associations, civic organisations, business and churches to get a holistic picture of the services they receive, and together find workable solutions to challenges.
	
	The committee will also visit various sites to see first-hand the delivery of services.
	
	Details of the meeting with the MECs are as follows:
	Date: Monday, 12 October 2020
	Time: 19:00
	Venue: Tshwane Metropolitan Chambers
	
	Link to the programme: https://tinyurl.com/yxqlwowy
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI. 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape