Parliament, Wednesday, 28 October 2020 – Gauteng's permanent delegates to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will tomorrow interact with the leadership of the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa) to get an overview of the state of the public transport system, specifically rail transport in Gauteng. The delegation will also visit various train stations to assess the impact of vandalism of infrastructure and impact of interventions to improve the effectiveness of train service.
	
	“A majority of the poor relies heavily on trains to access areas of economic activity, as well as schools. Late trains and the continuous vandalism of rail infrastructure have exacerbated an already stretched system, which has a direct impact on the livelihoods of our people. We need to find solutions to these challenges,” Ambassador Dangor emphasised.
	
	The delegation will visit the Katlehong Railway Station, Kliptown Railway Station and the Maraisburg Railway Station.
	
	To adhere to restrictions imposed by the National State of Disaster level 1 declaration, the programme will be hybrid, with the presentation in the morning being on a virtual platform, while the site visit will be done through contact session.
	
	Journalists wishing to accompany the delegation to site visits must confirm by 10:00, Thursday, 29 October 2020. DAY FOUR: TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE
					THURSDAY, 29 OCTOBER 2020 PHYSICAL – CONTACT OVERSIGHT VISITS TO RAILWAY STATIONS  TIME SESSION 10H00 – 10H10 Opening and Welcome Remarks: Chairperson of NCOP
					Hon. Amos Masondo 10h10 – 10h30 Briefing by the CEO of Transport on vandalism of railway infrastructure (Prasa)
					CEO - Tech Mr. Hishaam Emeran 10h30 - 11h00 Discussions 11h00– 11h10 Closing Remarks: Deputy Chairperson of Committees
					Hon. Mpapa Kanyane 11H10 – 12h00 LUNCH 12h00 Departure to site visits VISIT TO AFFECTED RAILWAY SITES 13h00 – 13h30 14H00 – 14H30 15H00 – 15h30  Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may follow committee and House sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE GAUTENG PROVINCIAL WHIP, AMBASSADOR MOHAMMED DANGOR. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo