Parliament, Thursday, 8 October 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy will from tomorrow, 9 October 2020, undertake a three-day oversight visit to Optimum and Lilly mines in Mpumalanga, Northam Platinum Limited Zondereide mine in Thabazimbi in Limpopo, and illegal mining sites in Gauteng.
	
	The purpose of the visit is to increase the committee’s oversight over the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy (DMRE) in relation to its responsibilities to implement the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act and ensure that the department accounts for progress made in meeting the challenges of dealing with business rescue practitioners.
	
	The committee took a resolution to conduct an onsite inspection at both Lilly and Optimum mines, as well as meet with families of the three miners who were trapped underground, in order to update them on the committee’s recommendations in relation to the accident, as well as a progress report from the DMRE.
	
	The decision to visit Northam mine in Thabazimbi, Limpopo, is based on a referral letter from the Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms Thandi Modise, which alleges that while the company has been in existence for 30 years, the community where it conducts operations has seen no benefit. The Speaker asked the committee to follow up and keep her abreast of developments.
	
	Lastly, the committee will also visit hotspot areas in Gauteng province where illegal mining is being reported to be increasing.
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES 
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape