Parliament, Wednesday, 7 October 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs has expressed its dismay over negative audit opinions in the majority of municipalities under Section 139 intervention in the 2018/19 financial year in KwaZulu-Natal (KZN).
	
	The committee said persistent poor audit outcomes compromise service delivery and undermine the objectives of the interventions. “We are of the considered view that the basis for a functional municipality is good governance and adherence to legislative and policy frameworks. Also, the intention of the intervention is to assist the municipalities to return to functionality, which is obviously not being achieved in these cases,” said Ms Faith Muthambi, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	The provincial government informed the committee that Inkosi Langalibalele Local Municipality received an adverse audit opinion; Umzinyathi District and Mpofana Local municipalities received disclaimer audit opinions; while Richmond, Uthukela, Msunduzi and Mtubatuba local municipalities each received qualified audit opinions.
	
	While the committee acknowledges the KZN Provincial Government’s frank and open introspection, it calls for hard decisions to be considered in those municipalities that are not improving.
	
	One such decision that can be taken is the dissolution of a municipality if the exceptional circumstances exist as prescribed in Section 139 (1) (c) of the Constitution. “We are cognisant of the fact that to invoke Section 139 (1) (c) of the Constitution requires proof that both the provincial and the national governments have supported the municipality to improve its performance. But it is an undeniable fact that some municipalities have been under administration since 2017 and that indicates perpetual and unresolved problems,” Ms Muthambi emphasised.
	
	Regarding investigations according to Section 106 of the Municipal Systems Act, the committee has acknowledged the impediment caused by the lack of an enforcement tool given to the MEC after an investigation is concluded. The committee has committed to engaging the national Department of Cooperative Governance to consider amendment to the Act to empower the MEC to enforce the recommended remedial actions after the investigations.
	
	The committee welcomes the report that the KZN’s Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs has received a clean audit in the 2018/19 financial year, which sets an excellent example for municipalities to improve their audit outcomes in the province.
	
	Regarding consequence management, the committee reiterates its call for decisive consequence management against those implicated in wrongdoing. “For example, the information that 82% of councillors in Mtubatuba Local Municipality are implicated in allegations of fraud, corruption and gross dishonesty is concerning and can only be rectified through effective consequence management,” said Ms Muthambi.
	
	Meanwhile, the committee considers it unacceptable that only three of the nine Municipal Public Accounts Committees are functional in the municipalities under Section 139, while the other six are either partially functional or dysfunctional, which negatively impacts on governance, accountability and effective consequence management.
	
	Despite this, the committee welcomes the cooperation between the provincial departments of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, and Treasury in supporting the municipalities to meet their constitutional obligations. Furthermore, the committee has made a call for the improvement of service delivery and effective management of the municipal financial resources in all the municipalities.
	
	The committee will today visit Ugu District Municipality to assess the state of the municipality and service delivery.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI. 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. African National Congress