Parliament, Wednesday, 28 October 2020 – The Western Cape’s permanent delegates to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) were in full swing today on their week-long oversight visit in the Kannaland Local Municipality.
	
	The visit is part of the Provincial Week programme of the NCOP and s carried out under the theme: “Ensuring capable and financially sound municipalities”.
	
	The delegation was briefed by the Kannaland Deputy Executive Mayor, Mr Phillipus Antonie, about progress on projects such as the sports fields in Zoar and the upgrade on the water reticulation plant.
	
	The Kannaland Local Municipality is located within the Garden Route District Municipality in the Western Cape. The municipal area is situated in the western part of the Little Karoo and includes the towns of Ladismith, Calitzdorp, Vanwyksdorp and Zoar. The municipality faces significant service delivery challenges, including the roll out of services to rural areas and under-serviced households, water supply shortages and lack of adequate investment in economic infrastructure.
	
	The Kannaland Local Municipality voluntarily requested to be placed under administration according to section 139 (5) of the Constitution. A financial recovery plan was developed as part of section 154’s support package.
	
	The Provincial Whip and Leader of the Western Cape Delegation, Ms Cathy Labuschagne, said: “The purpose of the delegation for this week is to focus on the interplay of support from the province, as well as the municipality’s role to ensure capacity for improving service deliver to communities, as well as the improvement of financial management.”
	
	She further highlighted that resolutions will be drafted and submitted in the form of a comprehensive report, with the cooperation of all relevant stakeholders, and these resolutions are to be implemented within a reasonable time.
	
	Tomorrow, the delegation will conclude the programme by interacting with the Municipal Administrator and the support team, the Municipal Manager, the Chief Financial Officer, the Executive Mayor, and all the Councillors, on the state of the municipality.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE PROVINCIAL WHIP OF THE WESTERN CAPE DELEGATION TO THE NCOP, MS CATHY LABUSCHAGNE. 
	
	For media inquiries or interviews with the Leader of the delegation, please contact:
	Mr Mlindi Mpindi
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 716 7329
	Email: mmpindi@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. Congress of the People on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo