Parliament, Wednesday, 7 October 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services has noted the progress made by the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) in the arrest of big corruption cases, albeit it is slow progress.
	
	Committee Chairperson, Mr Bulelani Magwanishe, said the committee noted the comments by the National Director of Public Prosecutions, Adv Shamila Batohi, that in the past, “these high-profile corruption cases might never have seen a courtroom”, and he congratulated the NPA for the vigour in which it has been pursuing these matters. Mr Magwanishe said: “We are comforted by the fact that you are hard at work and we will continue to support you.”
	
	The committee expressed a grave concern regarding the “unacceptably” high vacancy rate in the Asset Forfeiture Unit (AFU). The committee heard that the AFU has a 45% vacancy rate which impacted on the work done and targets achieved. In terms of the value of freezing orders obtained for corruption or offences relating to corruption, the target for the first quarter of 2020/2021 was R600 million against the achievement of R232 million. Regarding the value of recoveries relating to corruption or related offences, the target was R350 million, and the achievement was zero. “We will keep the AFU on our radar and engage with AFU later in the term again.”
	
	The NPA raised concerns about intended budget cuts by the National Treasury, proposed for the outer years of Medium Term Expenditure Framework. Concern was expressed that if these cuts were to be effected, the NPA will not be able to fill vacancies and more so not be able to pay salaries, and at the same time, that will undermine the commitment to rebuild the NPA.
	
	The committee assured the NPA that it will do everything in its power to ensure that the NPA remains properly resourced.
	
	The committee further expressed a grave concern regarding the “lawlessness” by protesters yesterday at the Senekal court. “Barging into the court is a threat to the rule of law. It is an act of intimidation against prosecutors and magistrates and we will not accept it. It must be condemned in the strongest possible terms.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, MR BULELANI MAGWANISHE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng