Parliament, Tuesday, 13 October 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA) will today, 13 October 2020, begin its oversight visit in Gauteng with an interaction with Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality. The ultimate aim is to ensure that municipalities achieve their objectives as set out in section 152 of the Constitution. “As public representatives we are enjoined by the Constitution to hold the executive accountable to ensure that taxpayers’ monies are spent accordingly for the benefit of the people. This oversight has as its central pillar the need to ensure that our people receive quality service delivery from their municipalities,” said Ms Faith Muthambi, the Chairperson of the committee. Yesterday the committee interacted with the MEC for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, together with the MEC for Treasury in the province to get an overview on the state of municipalities in the province in general. Today the committee will first interact with residence of Nellmapuis ext 22 at the ext 22 Multi-purpose Centre in Nellmapuis. The residents had written a petition to the committee complaining about lack of electrification in the area. The committee will then proceed to the water treatment plant in Hammanskraal to assess the quality of water in the area. This is part of the committee’s commitment to interact with stakeholders to get a holistic picture of the services they receive, and together find workable solutions to challenges. In the afternoon, the committee will engage with the City of Tshwane to get an update on service delivery and progress on petitions submitted to the committee.   ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape