Despite the national lockdown due the corona virus pandemic and the regulations encouraging social distancing, the people of Giyani in Limpopo came in considerable numbers to add their voices to how Section 25 of the Constitution should be amended. Strictly adhering to regulations, a delegation of the Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution listened for hours to participants in the Thomo Community Hall. Most participants were dressed in the various political parties’ t-shirts and articulated clearly their views on the matter. The leader of the delegation, Advocate Bongani Bongo, emphasised even before the hearings started that any person who has a view will be listened to, no matter how small or big the support for such views. “All views will be considered, but in the end, as within any democracy, the majority view will hold. We are here to hear the views of members of the public. It is a requirement when we want to amend any law or the Constitution, that public participation takes place. Our mandate is to make explicate what is implicate in the Constitution.” Ms Deidre Carter, Congress of the People Member of Parliament spoke on behalf of Limpopo farmers. She said the land owned by local and national government should rather be allocated instead of expropriating land from farmers. She said it the latter happens it will lead to economic difficulties. She was followed by a representative of Agri Letaba, a farming organisation in the area, who claimed land reform has not been done effectively in the past and many projects had been abandoned with land left unused. She said should the proposed amendment go ahead, it will have a knock-on effect for food security, unemployment and poverty. Those were however only a handful of views opposing the amendment compared to the overwhelming majority of participants that were in favour of it. Ms Maria Sekwela said such an amendment would lead to redressing the inequalities of the past. Mr Simon Mangena was in support of her view and said 70% of the land is owned by a small number of people, the whites, whereas black people remain landless. “Blacks must stick together on the matter in order to get the land, because without the land we are nothing. We are suffering because we experience evictions.” Mr Ignatius Sithole and several other participants were concise and to the point when they proposed that clause 2 of Section 25 should now include sub-clause 2(C), which should include subject to without compensation or nil compensation under conditions laid out in the law of general application. Furthermore, where compensation is payable, the amount should be just and equitable. They said clause 8 should be amended to include that the payment of compensation may not impede efforts to expropriate land for land reform purposes. Several other participants said the amendment should include that land and all its natural resources must belong to the state. Rajaa Azzakani24 October 2020 It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. African National Congress