Parliament, Wednesday, 28 October 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans has today received a briefing on the 2019/20 annual reports of the Military Ombud and the Military Veterans Appeals Board.
	
	The committee welcomes the improved performance of the Military Ombud against set targets in 2019/20 compared to 2018/19. However, the committee remains concerned about the costs associated with matters of litigation brought before the High Court. The committee is of the view that the department should not be responsible for carrying these costs, but rather they must be carried by the individual who had failed to implement the recommendations of the Military Ombud, and the subsequent court case.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Cyril Xaba, said: “We must at all cost avoid a situation where the taxpayer ends up paying for the insubordination of others”.
	
	Meanwhile, a member of the Military Veterans Appeals Board, Ms Nomsa Dlamini, told the committee that the increasing protests by military veterans around the country have the potential to destabilise the country. According to Ms Dlamini, The Appeals Board does not have an adequate budget for roadshows to inform military veterans of the mandate of the Appeals Board and the availability of this platform to air their grievances.
	
	While noting these concerns, the committee welcomes the improved relations between the Department of Military Veterans and the Appeals Board. The committee had, during its meeting on 24 June 2020, recommended that the department intervenes on several issues. One of these was the provision of tools of trade to enhance the functioning of the board, which have since been received, due to the intervention of the committee and the Deputy Minister, Mr Thabang Makwetla.
	
	One of the major challenges faced by the Appeals Board relates to the governance and accountability framework, which the Military Veterans Act does not address. The committee was told that this places the independence of the office at risk. The committee is in agreement, that the Appeals Board cannot be financially dependent on the same department against which its clients are aggrieved, adding that this creates a tenuous relationship.
	
	With regard to the lack of cooperation from the department, which often results in the board having to make default judgements, a member of the board, Mr Cyril Morolo, told the committee that the department should be afforded an opportunity of rescission, but this, he said, should be accompanied by a plea for condonations.
	
	While welcoming this decision, Mr Xaba said that these should form part of legislation and not just the rules and procedures of the Appeals Board.
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS, MR CYRIL XABA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Felicia Lombard (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 063 503 2364
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape