The message was clear from the people of Sekhukhune in Limpopo. They want expropriation of land without compensation without any further delay. Speaker of speaker told the Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution that the process has been dragging on for far too long, exacerbating poverty and unemployment, especially amongst the youth, in the region. The committee has been holding public hearings in the province since Thursday, 22 October, in an attempt to ascertain what the constitutional amending should look like. Adv Bongani Bongo, leader of the delegation, told the hearings that he understands their frustration and he explained the process. He said the Joint Constitutional Review Committee was tasked to establish the desirability of such an amendment to the Constitution and they received an overwhelming positive response. This committee is mandated to engage with the public on what the amendment should include. Mr David Mashielo told the meeting: “Give us the land. We as youth are able to work it. We can do it.” A woman, who did not provide her name, said that South Africa cannot allow the “clever blacks” to tell people that this will threatened food security. “My mother is a farm worker. We eat because of her. She works the land. So, food security not a threat.” She further said the state should be the custodian of the land as that would prevent corruption with only a few selected “friends” getting land. Mr Chauke Elias was clear and said the land should have been expropriated already. According to him the Constitution should be amended immediately to allow for land to be expropriated for equal distribution. Another man said unemployment amongst the youth is a challenge. “Some earn little money that is not even enough to feed a family. We want farms, not just land so we can plough.” In his closing remarks, Adv Bongo thanked the people for their disciplined participation. “This is an indication that black people are serious about taking back their land. Whatever you said was said almost by everyone else everywhere. Everyone speaks the same language.” Furthermore, he highlighted that changing a section in the Bill of Rights in Constitution required a two-thirds majority support in Parliament. “Currently no single political party has that. It will mean that parties that generally agree on the matter, will likely have to work together to ensure this materialises.” Rajaa Azzakani25 October 2020 Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng