Parliament, Monday, 19 October 2020 - Minister of Employment and Labour, Mr Thulas Nxesi, is scheduled to brief a hybrid plenary sitting of the National Assembly tomorrow on the disbursement of the Unemployment Insurance Fund.
	
	The Ministerial Briefing will be followed by a motion of condolences in honour of the four Members of Parliament who recently passed on, namely, the late Ms Dorah Dlamini, Ms Thandi Mpambo-Sibhukwana, Mr Zamuxolo Joseph Peters and Advocate Hishaam Mohamed.
	
	Details of the National Assembly Hybrid Sitting: 
	Date: Tuesday, 20 October 2020
	Venue: National Assembly Chamber and Virtual Platform
	Time: 14:00
	
	Meanwhile, members of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will receive a briefing from the Statistician-General, Mr Risenga Maluleke, on the Poverty Index and Poverty Lines in South Africa, as well as, the impact of the changes in the cost of goods and services, and consumption patterns on household poverty and food security.
	
	Details of the NCOP Briefing: 
	Date: Tuesday, 20 October 2020
	Venue: Virtual Platform
	Time: 10:00
	
	Note to media
	Media wishing to physically attend the hybrid sessions should send their details (full name, name of media house, ID or passport number) to Mr Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za.
	
	Members of the media who would like to observe the Sitting may forward their contact details to Mr Mlindi Mpindi on mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliament Communications Service WhatsApp group, where login details will be shared. Journalists are urged to forward the request using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliament’s precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are also open to the public. Members of the public may get involved and follow parliamentary sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), on Parliament’s YouTube channel and on Parliament’s Twitter page on the links below. You may also subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal