Parliament, Thursday, 15 October 2020 – The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) will tomorrow hold a follow-up meeting with Eskom on outstanding matters. These matters include a list of all vetted senior executive officials and supply chain management officials, the Black and Veatch contract, the Aveng contract and the cost-benefit analysis of the take or pay contracts.
	
	Scopa will also look at the details of the report on lifestyle audits for the 2018/19 financial year, and at cases that have been handed over to law enforcement agencies.
	
	Details of the meeting are as follows: 
	Date: Friday, 16 October 2020
	Time: 09:30
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8268
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo