Parliament, Friday, 23 October 2020 - Minister of Finance Mr Tito Mboweni will deliver the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) next week Wednesday, 28 October at 14h00 in the National Assembly.
	
	The MTBPS sets out the government’s three-year financial plans and communicates the economic context of the Budget Speech made in February 2020. The MTBPS makes it possible for Parliament and the public to interact with the budget plans ahead of the February national budget.
	
	The Adjustments Appropriation Bill, the Rates and Monetary Amounts and Amendment of Revenue Laws Bill and the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill, the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill and the Tax Administration Laws Amendment Bill will also be tabled and introduced.
	
	A limited number of media will be allowed, on first come first served basis, within the parliamentary precinct due to the Covid-19 pandemic and level 1 lockdown regulations. Only bonafide members of the media who will be reporting/working on the day will be allowed within the precinct.
	
	In compliance with Parliament’s Covid-19 procedure, all media personnel who will be covering the MTBPS will undergo mandatory Covid-19 screening and other health safety procedures. Accredited members of the media are thus encouraged to arrive on time to avoid delays.
	
	Media and Photographers who wish to physically attend the MTBPS hybrid session should send their details (full name, name of the media house, ID or passport number) to Mr Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za/  081 716 7329 before Monday, 26 October 2020 
	@12:00
	
	Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliament’s precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival.
	
	For accreditation to the lock-up briefing that precedes the delivery of the MTPBS in the National Assembly, Parliament, please contact National Treasury official Malehlohonolo Kasa on Malehlohonolo.Kasa@treasury.gov.za
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow parliamentary sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), on Parliament’s YouTube channel and on Parliament’s Twitter page on the links below. You may also subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal