Parliament, Tuesday, 13 October 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) has instructed the Gauteng Provincial Department of Cooperative Governance, Traditional Affairs and Human Settlements to honour a commitment they made to Parliament to electrify Ext 22 in Nellmapius.
	
	Parliament resolved on 4 June 2020, following a commitment by the department, that the area will be electrified by February 2021. The committee today visited the area and was astounded that no work has started and no contractor is on site to implement a commitment made by the department.
	
	“We know that procurement process in government is lengthy, and from the looks of things, the deadline will not be met. This is concerning in the context that the residents of the area are predominantly people living with disabilities. It is heart-breaking that residents have to purchase ice at exorbitant prices to store medication that is critical for their lives,” said Ms Faith Muthambi, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	The committee received a petition from the residents, and following engagements with the department, commitments were made. The committee intends to keep both the department and the municipality accountable.
	
	The fact that it has been over five years that the residents moved into the area without electricity is concerning. “What is even more concerning is that a nearby squatter camp that developed after Ext 22 has been electrified by the municipality. This creates conflict among communities and is grounds for discontent to fester against the government.
	
	The committee is concerned that the contractor failed to deliver the turnkey contract where the contractor is responsible for both the design and complete construction of a development, which has now resulted in an uncompleted project without electrical reticulation. Also, the committee is concerned that the contractor that is building roads is now being accused of the destruction of water reticulation pipes, leading to water loss.
	
	Furthermore, the committee has called for cooperation between government departments to ensure that all amenities including a police station, recreational facilities and economic development are developed in the area. “As a country we took a decision to move away from housing to human settlements as a way of ensuring that people have access to the necessary amenities where they stay. This is the reason we are calling for cooperation between the different spheres of government,” Ms Muthambi emphasised.
	
	The committee promised the residents of the area that it will continue monitoring the implementation of the commitment to ensure that the people of the area have electricity.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI. 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. African National Congress