Wednesday, 14 October
	Tshwane and Ekurhuleni, Gauteng
	15.00 to 18.00
	Virtual platform
	
	Parliament, Tuesday 13 October 2020 – The Women’s Charter Review sessions start in Gauteng tomorrow – in the Tshwane and Ekurhuleni Metros.
	
	Further metro-based sessions are scheduled for Gauteng later this month – in the Johannesburg, Sedibeng and West Rand Metros.
	
	These Charter review sessions follow those held in in the Northern Cape, the Free State, Limpopo and the North West earlier this year.
	
	The sessions aim to review the Women’s Charter for Effective Equality, which South Africa’s first democratic Parliament adopted in 1994.
	
	That charter had its origins in the Women’s Charter, which the Federation of South African Women (Fedsaw) adopted in April 1954. Fedsaw’s 1954 charter emphasised enfranchisement of all men and women; equal opportunities in employment; equal pay for equal work; equal rights in property, marriage and children; and getting rid of laws and customs denying women such equality.
	
	The 1994 Women’s Charter is being reviewed to take account of the ever-increasing violence against women, including rape and femicide.
	
	Sessions now underway aim to adopt a revised women’s charter – with concrete targets on policy, legislative changes and interventions – to remove historical and new structural, institutional and cultural barriers to achieving gender equality in our country.
	
	The provincial district review sessions in provinces are scheduled to be followed by high-level sessions with local and provincial governments, which must present response plans to issues raised. Parliament will follow up on these plans to ensure implementation.
	
	After Gauteng, the sessions will move to the Eastern Cape later this month.
	
	FOLLOW THE WOMEN’S CHARTER REVIEW SESSION TOMORROW
	Media wishing to get a link to the tomorrow’s virtual session must send their mobile phone numbers to Mr Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za, using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	Members of the public can also follow tomorrow’s Women’s Charter session and other parliamentary proceedings on the links below. If you subscribe to the Parliament’s YouTube channel you can get instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICAEnquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress