Parliament, Thursday, 8 October 2020 – The Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution today adopted its draft programme. It resolved to resume the public hearings in three provinces that it could not visit due to the Covid-19-related lockdown.
	
	The committee also resolved to consider the proposal to have two sessions of hearings per day, as lockdown regulations on level 1 prohibits gatherings larger than 250 people. Committee Chairperson Dr Mathole Motshekga said around 400 people attended previous hearings so it makes sense to have two sessions.
	
	The committee is expected to resume hearings in two groups and start in Limpopo and the Northern Cape on 22 October 2020. This will be followed by hearings in two groups in the Western Cape from 30 October 2020.
	
	The committee further resolved that will request a legal opinion on whether it should accept written submissions from those with co-morbidities who cannot attend public hearings due to Covid-19.
	
	Between 3 and 6 November 2020, the committee will consider the reports on all the public hearings before it begins deliberations on the amendments. The National Assembly has extended the lifespan of the committee until the end of this year following the outbreak of the pandemic. The committee will meet next week to make a final determination on its programme, including decisions on outstanding matters.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INITIATE AND INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AMENDING SECTION 25 OF THE CONSTITUTION, DR MATHOLE MOTSHEKGA
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape