Parliament, Wednesday, 28 October 2020 – The North West delegation to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) together with Members of the North West Legislature today visited water facilities and treatment plants in Brits, Letlhabile and Mothotlung as part of the 2020 Provincial Week Programme.
	
	The delegation raised serious concerns about the poor state of the Brits Water Treatment Plant which is dysfunctional, and lack of maintenance that affects water distribution to the communities in Brits and surrounding areas. This is in spite of the fact that millions of rands of public funds have been used on this plant, resulting in wasteful and fruitless expenditure.
	
	The delegation heard allegations of corruption that are being levelled against project managers. The project was started in 2014 and its completion was supposed to be in 2019, however, the envisaged new completion date is now in 2021.
	
	The delegation also visited the Letlhabile Waste Water Treatment Plant and Mothotlung Waste Water Treatment Plant in Madibeng Local Municipality. It was shocked by the poor state of these facilities. The collapse of these projects is attributed to vandalism and poor security. The delegation called for accountability and consequence management for those who are responsible.
	
	This has resulted in severe water shortage in the Madibeng Local Municipality and has posed serious environmental and health challenges to the communities.
	
	Mr Stephanus Du Toit raised a concern over the lack of security at the water treatment facilities and called for Madibeng Municipality to prioritize that problem going forward.
	
	To address the problem of the triple challenges of poverty, unemployment and inequality in Madibeng, the delegation urged the municipality to prioritize the young people in employment opportunities in the area.
	
	The member of the delegation and the Chairperson of the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance, Water and Sanitation, Mr China Dodovu, raised a concern that in all the reports presented by the provincial government to the NCOP delegation, there are no concrete plans to turn around the dire situation in the municipalities in the provinces.
	
	He said: “Honourable Premier and MEC of CoGTA, we need a turnaround plan as a matter of urgency.” He urged the department of CoGTA to utilize section 54 of the Constitution to assist the municipalities to strengthen their capacity as they are collapsing due to financial crises.
	
	The Chair of Chairs in the North West Legislature, Mr Mmoloki Cwaile, has called on the Provincial Department of CoGTA to stick to legislative powers to resolve challenges that are facing the municipalities and desist from blaming political infighting.
	
	He argued that the challenges experienced by the department are as a result of dereliction of duty and the department should develop an integrated plan to support municipalities.
	
	The delegation also received presentations from local municipalities on their state of municipalities, including challenges they are experiencing. Naledi Local Municipality from Dr Ruth Mompati District Municipality, Maquassi Hills Local Municipality from Dr Kenneth Kaunda District Municipality, Mahikeng Local Municipality and delegates from the Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality presented their state of the municipalities.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE PROVINCIAL WHIP OF THE NORTH WEST PROVINCIAL DELEGATION TO THE NCOP, MR ERIC LANDSMAN
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Provincial Whip, please contact the Delegation’s Media Officer:
	Name: Wiseman Nombanda
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8093
	Cell: 072 984 9687
	E-mail: wnombanda@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. Pan Africanist Congress