Parliament, Friday, 30 October 2020 – The KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) delegation to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) today wrapped up its week-long oversight visit in the province as part of the NCOP’s 2020 Provincial Programme.
	
	The delegation received virtual briefings from Umzinyathi and Uthukela district municipalities and Mpofana Local Municipality on their municipal audit outcomes, financial management, financial controls, revenue collection, municipal debt, fruitless expenditure, the usage of consultants and the status of war rooms in their wards.
	
	The delegation heard from the provincial representatives that all 388 war rooms were fully functioning, albeit some that experienced some challenges, such as the lack of participation by the South African Police Services, dilapidated infrastructure, lack of water and electricity, and lack of understanding of the common guidelines and framework on the functioning of war rooms.
	
	However, Premier Sihle Zikalala assured the delegation that Operation Sukuma Sakhe is being reengineered and it will be mandatory for key government departments, the district and local municipalities to support their respective war rooms. Each provincial MEC who serve as a district champion will receive regular briefings and will process those issues.
	
	At Umzinyathi, Uthukela and Mpofana muncipalities, the delegation found similar challenges, such as the provision of water, debt to Eskom, lack of revenue collection as the areas are largely rural and the communities are indigent. Provincial Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) has allocated R339 million to address the water challenges. The Premier informed the delegation that the MEC for Cogta, Mr Hlomuka, signed a Memorandum of Understanding with all Section 139 (1) (b) municipalities to ensure they become sustainable.
	
	The NCOP delegation presented their Draft Report: Provincial Week 26 – 30 October 2020, which was adopted and will be tabled to the Chairperson at the National Council of Provinces.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES, ON BEHALF OF THE PROVINCIAL WHIP, AND LEADER OF THE DELEGATION, MS LINDIWE BEBEE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Provincial Whip, please contact the delegation’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo