Parliament, Thursday, 29 October 2020 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson, welcomes the arrest of two Gauteng station commanders on allegations of gun licence fraud.
	
	“The arrests add impetus to the fight against the proliferation of guns on our streets, and is a step in the right direction in removing corrupt elements among members of the South African Police Service (SAPS),” Ms Joemat-Pettersson said.
	
	The two brigadiers have been arrested for their alleged involvement in fraud, defeating the administration of justice and contravention of the Firearms Control Act.
	
	“It is unacceptable that these police officers, holding senior positions within the SAPS, could defraud the system and fraudulently hand out competency and licences to possess a firearm. This not only undermines the gun licence regime but also places citizens at risk by giving unfit people the right to possess firearms.
	
	“We are confident that those in the wrong will be subjected to the full might of the law. We hope that these arrests will also act as a deterrent for those that are tempted to break the law,” Ms Joemat-Pettersson emphasised.
	
	The committee raised its concerns about the early release of former police Colonel Chris Prinsloo on parole after only four years of an 18-year sentence. In this respect, the committee will be convening a joint Peace and Stability Cluster meeting in Parliament to bring the Criminal Justice System to work together towards the safety of all South Africans.
	
	Meanwhile, the Chairperson highlighted her concerns with the unabated gender-based violence and maiming of young people in South Africa. “I have learned with shock of the death of six-year-old Inathi Mhlahlo from Mdantsane in the Eastern Cape. The barbarism of raping and killing a six-year-old is uncalled for and the police must intensify their investigation to bring the perpetrators of this heinous crime to book,” Ms Joemat-Pettersson said.
	
	The Chairperson has emphasised the call for intensified strategies to fight GBV and violence against the most vulnerable in our society. The committee will continue to engage the senior management of the SAPS to ensure the strengthened fight against crime and corruption.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MS TINA JOEMAT-PETTERSSON.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the Committees’ Media Officer:
	
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng