Parliament, Friday, 30 October 2020 – A delegation of the Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution today heard that the people of Mossel Bay want land expropriation without compensation to be expedited.
	
	The delegation held hearings in Mossel Bay today before it moves to Worcester tomorrow to repeat the process. Committee Chairperson Dr Mathole Motshekga emphasised that the committee’s mandate is to consider what form the content of the Constitutional amendment should take. Dr Motshekga commended the meeting for practicing social distancing and adhering to the regulations of the National Lockdown Level 1.
	
	Participants came from as far as Oudtshoorn and Knysna to participate in the hearings. Speaker after speaker indicated the difficulties they find themselves in as landless people. A representative from the Rastafarian community told the committee that Rastafarians are oppressed as they are prevented from entering the forest to gather the herbs that they use. These spaces are essential for Rastafarians and traditional healers.
	
	Many participants indicated that the state must be the custodian of the land, including natural resources. One participant from Knysna told the delegation that he knows of a person that owns more than 10 farms. He said land should be made available without compensation to all needy people. If this does not happen, South Africans will not be self-sufficient or feel a part of the country.
	
	Some members of the Khoisan community claimed their needs have been ignored, even though they are the first citizens of South Africa. They live in horrible conditions in backyards or on farms when they should be land owners.
	
	A minority of the participant were completely against amending the Constitution. Some indicated that the Constitution already provided for the expropriation of land. They blamed government for not being able to implement laws and regulations to give effect to this.
	
	Dr Motshekga said all views will be taken into account when political parties deliberate on the matter in Parliament, as the support of more than one political party is needed to obtain a two thirds majority for such an amendment to be passed.
	
	The hearings of this delegations move to Worcester tomorrow.
	
	Details of the hearings are as follows:  Western Cape 31 October 11:00 Worcester Zwelethemba Community Hall  ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INITIATE AND INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AMENDING SECTION 25 OF THE CONSTITUTION, DR MATHOLE MOTSHEKGA. For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape