Parliament, Monday 26 October 2020 – President Cyril Ramaphosa will answer oral questions in the National Council of Provinces, tomorrow, Tuesday 27 October 2020 at 15:00.
	
	During the virtual plenary, the President will answer questions on matters related to hotspots for gender-based violence, diplomatic trip to Zimbabwe, Covid-19 corruption/procurement irregularities, sustainability of municipalities and public transport infrastructure restoration.
	
	For all six questions to the President, please click here.
	
	Details of the plenary:
	Date: 27 October 2020
	Time: 15:00
	Venue: Virtual platform
	
	Meanwhile, the National Assembly will during its hybrid sitting consider the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the appointment of Auditor-General of South Africa. The sitting follows the committee’s unanimous agreement to recommend Ms Tsakani Maluleke as a suitable candidate for the position of the Auditor-General of South Africa.
	
	At the same sitting, there will also be a debate on an urgent matter of national importance: Corruption related to COVID 19 tenders, sponsored by the Leader of the Opposition, Mr John Steenhuisen.
	
	Details of the plenary
	Date: 27 October 2020
	Time: 14:00
	Venue: NA chamber and Virtual Platform
	
	Important to note:
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the NA hybrid sitting should send their details (full name, name of the media house, ID or passport number) to Masego Dlula on email: mdlula@parliament.gov.za by no later than 10.00 TOMORROW, 27 October
	
	Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliamentary precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow committee and House sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo: 082 370 6930 Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape