Parliament, Wednesday 21 October 2020 – Deputy President David Mabuza will tomorrow, Thursday 22 October, appear in the National Assembly(NA) hybrid plenary sitting for oral replies to questions from NA Members.
	
	Parliament uses a range of instruments to hold the Executive accountable, which include putting questions to the Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa. Section 92(2) of the Constitution stipulates that Cabinet Members are accountable collectively and individually to Parliament for the exercise of powers and performance of their functions.
	
	The six questions to the Deputy President scheduled for tomorrow's sitting cover a range of matters, including: DETAILS OF THE NA HYBRID SITTING : Date: Thursday, 22 October 2020 Time: 14.00 
	Venue: NA Chamber, Parliament and online platform For all six questions to the Deputy President, please click: Question Paper Meanwhile, the NCOP will also hold its hybrid sitting to pay tribute to healthcare workers on the frontline of the fight against the Covid-19 pandemic, and to the outgoing Auditor-General of South Africa, Mr Kimi Makwetu, whose term of offices comes to an end on 30 November 2020. DETAILS OF THE NCOP HYBRID SITTING: Date: Thursday, 22 October 2020 Time: 14.00 
	Venue: NCOP Chamber, Parliament and online platform Important to note: Members of the media who wish to physically attend the NA AND NCOP hybrid sittings should send their details (full name, name of the media house, ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: mmpindi@parliament.gov.za by no later than 10.00 TOMORROW, 22 October Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliamentary precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival. Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may follow committee and House sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo: 082 370 6930 Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng