Parliament, Tuesday 20 October 2020 – Members of Parliament of both Houses will tomorrow debate President Cyril Ramaphosa’s address on South Africa’s Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan. The hybrid joint sitting debate follows the president’s address last week where he unveiled plans to drive the country’s economic recovery following the country being under lockdown.
	
	Details of the joint sitting are as follows:
	
	Date: Wednesday, 21 October 2020
	Time: 15:00
	Venue: NA Chamber and Virtual Platform
	
	Important to note:
	
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the Joint Sitting should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Masego Dlula on email: mdlula@parliament.gov.za no later than TUESDAY, 20 October 2020 at 17.00.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to also forward their contact details to Mr Mpindi on the email above for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. Democratic Alliance