Parliament, Friday, 9 October 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure will tomorrow embark on an oversight visit to the Jersey Barrier Wall Project at the border between South Africa and Mozambique in KwaZulu-Natal.
	
	The purpose of the oversight visit is to assess progress on the R85.7 million project, which entails upgrading and developing border control infrastructure along a section of the South African and Mozambican border.
	
	The project is spearheaded by the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure in conjunction with the KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Government’s Department of Transport. It is being undertaken in response to complaints raised by communities in the area in 2016. The communities complained that the border has become a point of access for crime, including smuggling and transporting stolen vehicles from South Africa into Mozambique.
	
	Details of the visit are as follows:
	
	Date: Saturday, 10 October 2020
	Morning programme begins: 10.00am 
	Venue: Border Wall Manufacturing Plant, Manguzi (Site 1)
	
	Afternoon programme begins: 13.00
	Venue: Jersey Barrier Wall, Kosi Bay Border (Site 2)
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES.
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Nolizwi Magwagwa (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 716 5824
	E-mail: nmagwagwa@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng