Tuesday, 13 October
	10.00 to 14.00
	NCOP Chamber at Parliament and virtual platform
	
	Parliament, Monday 12 October 2020 – Minister of Employment and Labour Mr Thulas Nxesi is scheduled to brief a hybrid session of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) tomorrow on progress made on measures to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on employment and labour and allegations and cases of fraud and corruption related to the pandemic.
	
	NCOP Members and Special Delegates will also discuss Minister Nxesi’s briefing and the Minister will then respond to the discussion, during this first hybrid session of the NCOP.
	
	A second session, following the ministerial briefing and discussion on it, will focus on Members of Executive Councils’ provincial plans to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on provincial economies and labour, especially on employment creation.
	
	The hybrid sitting entails a limited number of Members of the NCOP being physically present in the NCOP Chamber and others joining through a virtual platform.
	
	For tomorrow’s full programme, please click: https://tinyurl.com/y2flxvmd
	
	Note to media
	Media wishing to physically attend the hybrid session should send their details (full name, name of media house, ID or passport number) to Mr Mlindi Mpinndi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za.
	
	Members of the media who would like to observe the Sitting may forward their contact details to Mr Mlindi Mpindi on mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliament Communications Service WhatsApp group, where login details will be shared. Journalists are urged to forward the request using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliament’s precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are also open to the public. Members of the public may get involved and follow parliamentary sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), on Parliament’s YouTube channel and on Parliament’s Twitter page on the links below. You may also subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal