Parliament, Friday, 23 October 2020 – A delegation of the Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution today commended the people of Greater Giyani who turned out to make inputs it described as “meaningful and that were made in a disciplined manner”, and in a format that the Constitutional amendment should take.
	
	The delegation has been holding hearings in the Limpopo Province since Thursday and will continue until Sunday to listen to the people of the province. The leader of the delegation, Adv Bongani Bongo, said it was clear that the majority of the participants at the meeting were eager for the expropriation of land without compensation to be accelerated in order to address the socio-economic challenges like poverty and unemployment.
	
	Some of the participants indicated that clause 2 of Section 25 should now include sub-clause 2(C) which should include subject to without compensation or nil compensation under conditions laid out in the law of general application. Furthermore, where compensation is payable, the amount should be just and equitable. They said clause 8 should be amended to include that the payment of compensation may not impede efforts to expropriate land for land reform purposes.
	
	Whilst other participants indicated that the Constitution should be amended to ensure that the state is the custodian of all the natural resources of the country.
	
	A small minority, however, felt that expropriation of land is not the way to achieve economic and land transformation. Adv Bongo emphasised that all the views, irrespective of how small the support for the input, will be taken into account during deliberations on the question. “However, as in any democracy, people must remember that the majority view will stand. At this stage a two-thirds majority is required to amend the Constitution. No political party, currently, has that number of seats in Parliament. This means that those parties who agree on this matter will have to work together when we must vote on the matter.”
	
	The hearings will continue tomorrow and the details are as follows:
	Date: 24 October 2020
	Time: 11:00
	Venue: Jane Furse Comprehensive Hall, Sekhukhune
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE LIMPOPO LEADER OF THE DELEGATION OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INITIATE AND INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AMENDING SECTION 25 OF THE CONSTITUTION, ADVOCATE BONGANI BONGO
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape