Parliament, Wednesday, 14 October 2020 – The Portfolio Committee on Tourism has adopted a report that seeks to rally all stakeholders towards an all-encompassing Tourism Transformation Charter in South Africa.
	
	As a development state, the economy in South African is guided by government interventions, policy and planning. The development agenda is guided by principles of empowerment, inclusivity and transformation, with the view of advancing economic opportunities for all citizens.
	
	The broad-based black economic empowerment (B-BBEE) policy agenda seeks to redress anomalies such as the ownership of enterprises, management and control of enterprises, procurement, enterprise development, skills development, employment equity and socio-economic development. As a driver for economic development, the tourism sector is key in addressing issues of past inequalities. However, 26 years later, the tourism industry, like many other economic sectors, still suffers from the structural economic imbalances of the past.
	
	The Portfolio Committee on Tourism therefore made a call for public submissions on strategies to transform the tourism sector. A number of submissions were received and grouped into eight themes, with recommendations in relation to each theme.
	
	The themes are training, entrepreneurial development and the role of the youth; product development; access and maintenance of tourist attractions; broad-based black economic empowerment; opposition to state intervention in tourism transformation; embracing information technology (fourth industrial revolution); creating a sustainable tourism future in response to the Covid-19 pandemic; and tourism education.
	
	The committee has identified a number of other portfolio and select committees that will be integral in advancing transformation in the tourism sector. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Supra Mahumapelo, said: “The committee calls for cooperation and collaboration as it will embark on a number of joint committee meetings and joint oversight programmes with various committees in highlighting the supporting roles of other government departments in the fulfilment of the constitutional tourism mandate”. The Minister of Tourism has also been requested to rally the government departments around a common purpose of transforming the tourism sector.
	
	The role of the private sector and civil society, including traditional leadership as led by the National House of Traditional Leadership will also be pivotal in this transformation path.
	
	Part of the transformation agenda that the committee is calling for, is more and deliberate focus on unlocking and unleashing the tourism potential of the villages, townships and small towns, because research has confirmed that poverty, inequality and unemployment is highly concentrated in these areas.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, MR SUPRA MAHUMAPELO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal